RUDENS.

SCENE, By the Sea-side, in a Village nigh Cyrene, with many Rocks and Cliffs
at the further end of the Stage. On one side, appears Cyrene, at a distance; on
the other, Demones' s House, and a Temple of Venus, with a Court before it, and
in it, an Altar: Besides some scattered Houses at a distance.

TIME, About Eight or Nine Hours, beginning at Five or Six a Clock in the
Morning.

Gallants, YE must know, I dwell in the Celestial Palaces above, a Subject of
that mighty God who shakes all Nations, Seas, and Earth. I'm a bright and
shining Constellation, as ye see me, Arcturus by Title, one who ne'er failed to
keep regular Hours, both here and in Heaven. In the Night-time, I twinkle in
the Sky, and among the Gods; when day comes, I converse with Mortals, as the
rest of the Constellations do, who have the same Commission from above. Jove,
the Grand Monarch of Heaven and Earth, every day disperses us through all
Countries, t'inspect the Actions, Manners, Religion, and Fidelity of Mortals,
that the Goddess of Riches may reward 'em as they deserve. When ever we meet with
Fellows who hire Knights of the Post in Law-Sutes, and Rascals who for swear
themselves in Chancery, we return their Names in writing to Jove, who each day
is informed of all whom the Gallows groans for. He knows each Man that's
perjured, or bribes his Judge to gain his Cause; upon which, he brings it about
in the upper Court, and sets a severer Fine upon his Head than the loss of his
Cause would have come to. The Names of the good Men he keeps in a Book by it
self. Now these Rogues fool themselves with a fancy that a lusty Present, and a
Sacrifice, will make amends for all; but they lose their Labour and Cost too:
For Jove accepts not the Prayers of perjured Villains. But the Prayers of an
honest Man's heard a thousand times sooner than of one of these Rascals.
Therefore, good Gentlemen, let my advise ye, you who are honest indeed, and
have always been good and truehearted, ne'er to recede from your Principles,
that so you may have the Comfort of 'em. -- Now, Gentlemen I'm ready to wait
upon ye, and tell ye the Argument of the Play.

First then, Diphilus calls this City, Cyrene. Here dwells Demones in the
Field, in a Neighbouring Village by the Sea-side; a good honest well-meaning
old Gentleman, forced to leave Athens, and take up here. 'Twas no ill Prank
that drove him from his Country; but his Generosity to others, proved so
injurious to himself, as it ruined his Estate at last. Sometime since, he had a
little Daughter, who was kidnapped away, and sold to a Villainous
Slave-Merchant, who brought her home to Cyrene. Now it seems, a young Gentleman
of this City, and formerly of Athens, by chance spies this Girl coming from the
Musick-School, and immediately is stricken with her; goes strait to the
Merchant, bargains with him to have her for threescore and fifteen Pounds,
gives him earnest, and swears him to Fidelity. Now this Son of a Whore, like
the rest of his Gang, valuing neither Promise nor Oath, goes immediately to a
Banker of his, a Sicilian of Agrigentium, an old Rascal as ill as himself, and
a public Bane to the City. This Man he wheedles with the huge Commendations of
this Girls Beauty, and others he had with him, so gets him to go over with him
to Sicily: For, says he, there the People are mightily given to their
Pleasures, and Women are their best Commodity, so you may get an Estate in a
little time. Upon which, a Ship is prepared underhand; the Merchant claps all
his Effect on board, and flames off the young Gentleman, who bought this Girl,
with a pretence he was going to perform a Vow to Venus. -- This Temple here, is
the Place; where he has invited the Spark to Dinner. He immediately gets on
board, and carries off Bag and Baggage. The Gentleman upon hearing of this
News, goes strait to the Haven, and there finds the Ship got clear off from the
Shore. -- I, seeing the Girl thus forced away, resolved at once to save her,
and ruin the Rascal. Therefore I stirred up the blustering Winds, and swelled
the Oceans Waves: For Arcturus is the most turbulent Constellation in the
Heavens; outrageous when rising, but more outrageous sitting. -- At present,
both Merchant and Guest are thrown upon a Rock, which split their Ship in
pieces. This Girl I told y' of, and another with her, in a fright, are leaped
into the little Boat; and are now driven by the Tide, from the Rock towards the
Shore, and old Demones' s House, which is now unroof'd by the Wind; and this is
one of his Servants that's now coming out his House. The young Spark will be
here strait who bought this Girl of this Merchant. -- Gallants adieu, and may
your joyful Cries,
Be always formidable to your Enemies.


Exit.

HEavens bless us all! What a plaguy storm has old Neptune sent us this Night!
The Wind has all untiled our House here. What shall I call it? It can be no
Wind, but some Conjurer raising the Devil; for all the Tiles are come rattling
down, and the Windows shattered, so we shall keep open House now.


Well, Gentlemen, I've taken ye off your Business, and still our searching's to
no purpose; for I could n't catch this rascally Bawd at the Haven. But I would
n't have my carelessness ruin my Hopes; and therefore, my Friends, I'm forced to
detain ye the longer. -- So now I'll visit the Temple of Venus here, where the
Fellow designed to sacrifice, as he told me.


Upon my honour, I shall take a new Course with this damnable Clay, that has
almost killed me.


I hear some body's Voice just by.


Sceparnio!


Who calls me?


He that bought and paid for ye.


As much as to say, I'm your Servant: Sir?


We shall want a world of Mortar, therefore dig deep: The whole House must be
new-roof'd; for now 'twill no more shelter a Man than a Sive.


Father, well met; -- and you too.


Good morrow t'ye, Sir.


Are ye Man or Woman, that you call him Father?


A Man, undoubtedly.


If so, you must seek elsewhere. I had once a little Daughter, which I lost
formerly, but ne'er had a Son i'my Life.


Heavens grant ye the Blessing of one.


And you the Plague of one, who ever you are; for troubling us with your Tattle,
when we've business enough of our own.


Pray, do ye live at this House?


Why that Question? You lay lurking here to break it open in the night-time,
do ye?


He had need be a rich and faithful Servant, who dares thus interrupt his
Master, and show himself so uncivil to a Gentleman.


And he a bold and impudent Fellow, who comes to be impertinent before another
Man's Door; who owes him ne'er a Penny.


Hold your Tongue Sceparnio. -- What is't you want, young Gentleman?


T'ha' that Fellow kicked, for his Impudence in interposing before his Master.
-- But, if it be no hindrance to your Bu'ness, I've a Question or two to ask
ye.


Sir, it shall not disturb my business.


Prithee go into the Marsh, and cut Reeds for us to thatch our House with, now
'tis dry Weather.


Sirrah, be silent. -- Well, Sir, your Pleasure.


Then let me ask ye, whether you saw ever a grey, frizl'd-crown, villainous,
perjured, wheedling Rascal?


O, a multitude: For such as these, have been the ruin of me.


He that I speak of, brought two young Women to the Temple of Venus, either
Yesterday or to Day, to prepare for a Sacrifice.


Truly, Sir, I saw no such Person, nor has there been any Sacrifice, this long
Time; nor could there be, without my knowledge; when there is, they always come
hither for Water, Fire, Vessels, Knives, Spit, Seething Pot, or something or
other. In short, my Vessels and Well are for Venus's use, not mine; and I can
assure ye, there has been a cessation these many Days.


By this, I perceive I'm ruined.


Really, Sir, I wish I could help ye.


Hark ye, Sir, you that haunt the Temple for your Belly-sake; you'd better
march home and dine on what you can get. I warrant ye, you were invited hither,
and the Fellow ga' ye the Slip, that's your Ailment.


Very well?


Without Controversy, you may go home without your Dinner. You'd better follow
Ceres Governor of the Cupboard, than Venus Ruler of the Bed, for you're more
Sheep-stealer than Whore-master.


The Fellow grows shamefully scurrilous.


Bless me! What People are yonder, nigh the Shore, Sceparnio?


I fancy they're some damnable Gamesters.


Why so?


Because they've lost all, their Ship and all.


'Tis true, they have.


And our House has nothing but Rubbish t'entertain 'em with.


Alas! poor little Souls, how many are there? -- Lord, how they swim for their
Lives!


Pray now, where are they?


Yonder, on the right-hand; -- don't ye see 'em floating by the Shore?


I do --


So we would without your bidding. -- Palemon, Neptune's best Friend and
Companion, what a dreadful Sight do I see! --


Prithee, what is't?


I vow, two little Girls, all alone, in a small Boat. -- How lamentably are the
poor Creatures tossed! -- softly, -- softly, -- well recovered! -- The Tide
drives the Boat from the Rock to the Shore. A Pilot could n't do it better. -- I
think I ne'er saw the Sea run so high, i'my born Days. -- They're safe, if the
Waves don't catch 'em. -- Now, -- now, -- comes all the Danger! -- So, there's
one washed out; -- but by good luck, fallen upon the Flats: She'll easily get
off. -- Huzzah! Do ye see how the Billows have thrown her a shore? -- She's upon
her Feet, and makes this way: -- All's well, all's well! -- O, the other's
leaped a shore too; and the poor Soul's upon her Knees in the Water for fear. --
Very well! she's up, and upon dry Land. -- She's taken to the right, to her
sorrow, I'll warrant her; for, faith, she may wander there all Day. --


What does that concern your Work?


-- But if she chance to tumble down yon Cliff, she'll make but a short cut of
her Ramble. --


Nay, if you've a mind to sup wi'their Fare, Sceparnio, follow them; if with
mine, follow me.


That's but reasonable.


Come along then.


Well, Sir.


How ill soever Men's Miseries are represented, they still fall short of Truth
and Experience. Is't Heaven's pleasure, to throw my on these unknown Coasts, in
a dreadful Fright, and in this very Garb? Was I born to be exposed to these
Calamities? Is't the Reward of my strict Life? I should not think these
Miseries so severe, had I offended against Heaven, or my Parents: But if I've
been so exact i'my Duty to both, it seems unbecoming, O ye Gods, nay unjust,
and unreasonable, t'afflict me thus. Ah what dreadful Punishments must Villains
meet with, if virtuous Persons be so hardly dealt withal? If I could call to
mind any of my own or Parents Faults, I should bear it better; but 'tis my
Master's, I'm punished for; his Crimes fall heavy upon my Head. He has lost his
Ship, and all he's worth, except me, the only remainder of his Fortune; for my
Companion in the Boat, is perished, and now I'm all alone. Were she but safe,
her Company would have been some relief to my Griefs. But now, what hope, help,
or Counsel am I capable of? I'm forced to wander all alone i'these wild
Deserts. On one side, craggy Cliffs; on the other, the Ocean's foaming Surges;
and not a living Soul to meet with. My Clothes are my Riches; and I know
neither where to find Sustinence, or a House to hide my Head in. What desire
can I have to live then? I'm a Stranger to this Place; ne'er was here before
this Time. -- Ah would some good Body would but direct m'into some Road, or
Foot-Path. -- Shall I take this way, or that way? I am n't able to resolve; and
I can't perceive a foot of Habitable Land hereabouts. A Chillness, a Faintness,
and the great Fright, have seized on all my Joints. Alas, my dear Father and
Mother! you know nothing of these sad Afflictions. I was born a Gentlewoman, it
avails nothing; I'm more miserable than if born a Slave; for I can ne'er be any
Comfort to those who ga' me Birth and Education.


What can be more proper, or more necessary, than making way with my self, as
long as I'm under these Miseries, and Afflictions? I cannot be solicitous of
Life, since I'm deprived of the Person who made it easy to me. I've wandered
through all Places, searched into every little Hole to find her, called,
looked, and listn'd as much as possible. -- I can find her no where, know not
where to go, how to look for her, or whom t'enquire of, for here's not a Soul
to be seen. -- Sure there's no such dismal Desert upon the Face of the Earth,
as this. But if she be alive, and above ground, I'll ne'er give over searching
till I've found her.


What Voice can this be here?


I vow, I'm strangely afraid. -- Who's that so nigh me?


Blessed Hope, assist me! --


'Tis a Woman's Voice, I know it by the Sound.


-- And free me from my Fears.


It must be a Woman's Voice, for certain.


Good now, is't Ampelisca?


Is't you, Palestra?


Why don't I call her by her Name, that she may know me? -- Ampelisca.


Hah! who's that?


'Tis I, Palestra.


Prithee, whereabouts are ye?


Truly, amidst a thousand Troubles.


I'm your Partner, and have as large a share as you. -- I long strangely to see
ye.


And I as much.


Then let's follow by the Ear. -- Where are ye?


Here; come this way and meet me.


As fast as I can.


Your Hand, my Dear.


Take it.


Art thou alive? Prithee tell me.


Yes, and so wish to live, while I touch thee, I can scarce believe I have ye
here. Pray let my embrace thee, my Soul. --


You've prevented me from saying the same thing. -- But let's be going now.


Prithee, my Dear, which way shall we take?


Along the Shore, I think.


Which way you please, I'll follow.


Shall we go so, with our Clothes all wet?


For that, we must make as good a shift as we can -- But pray now, what's that?


Which?


Prithee, don't ye see a Temple? -- D' ye see that?


Where?


Of the right-hand.


I see the Gods respect this Place.


Then men can be no Strangers to it, the Situation's so delightful too. -- Who
e'r's the God, I'll beg of him t'ease us Wretches in our Miseries, and to grant
us some Assistance, i'this poor and sad Condition.


Who are these, that beg my Patroness's Protection? Their Prayers have brought
m'out to see who they are. They've certainly pitched upon the kindest,
tenderest, and best natured Goddess that could be.


Heavens bless ye, good Mother.


Bless ye both, my Children. -- Pray where were ye going, wi'your Clothes so
wet, in that pitiful Condition?


We came but a little way now: But 'tis a huge way from the Place we first set
out at.


You came in a Ship, by Sea then?


Yes, an't please ye.


Y'ought to ^ha come then to this Temple wi'your Proper Habits, and your
Off'rings; for 'tis ne'er usual to come in this manner.


Alas, what Off'rings can y'expect, when we were both cast away at Sea? -- --


Give me your Hands, and rise both of ye: No Woman can be more sensible of your
Miseries than I. But alas, my Children, mine's but a poor and mean Place: I can
scarce keep Life and Soul together, and have all my Dependence upon Venus here.


Pray now, is this Venu^'s Temple?


Yes, and I'm her Priestess. -- But you shall be heartily welcome, as far as my
poor Stock will go. -- Come along.


Truly, Mother, you've a kind and tender care of us.


'Tis my Duty.


WE, Poor Folks, have every way a lamentable Life on it, especially since we
were brought up to neither Trade, nor Calling; so we are forced to be content
with that little we have. Ye may guess how rich we are, by our fine Garbs. These
Hooks and Rods are all our Trade and Livelihood. We make Incursions, every Day,
from the Town to the Sea, for Forage; and all our Fights and Combats are
against whole Beds of Crabs, Lobsters, Oysters, Pinpatches, Coral, Muscles, and
Cockles; after which, we fall upon other Fish with our Hooks, and upon those
among the Rocks. We table upon the Sea; and if we chance to have no luck, we
slink home, well liquored with salt-Water, and go supperless to bed. -- Now 'tis
such a hoaming Sea, we've little hopes of Sport; and except we light of some
Shell-Fish, we must even make a Fast-Night on it, in Faith. -- But we'll pray
first to kind Venus, to send us good Luck.


I've been searching with all the Eyes i'my Head, to find out my Master. When
he first went out, he told me he was gone to the Haven; but ordered me to meet
him here at the Temple of Venus. -- But hold, here are People very luckily to
enquire of; I'll up to'em. --


We do like poor Fishermen, full of Hunger, Thirst, and Hopes.


Did ye see ever a Young Gentleman, the Time ye were here, a genteel,
fresh-colour'd, lusty Man, and three Companions, wi'their Cloaks and Swords?


We saw no such Man, as you describe.


Then did ye see ever an old Bald-pated, Beetle-Brow'd, Gotch-Gutted,
Squint-Ey'd, Sowr-Fac'd Rascal, the very Canker-Worm of Heaven and Earth, and
Store-House of Mischief, Roguery, and Villainy, leading of two good likely
Girls?


A Fellow with these Virtues, and Graces, is a fitter Companion for Hell, than
the Temple.


If ye saw any such, speak.


I assure ye, we did not. -- Good morrow.


Adieu t'ye: I thought ye might.


I believe 'tis just as I thought it would be. My Master's bubl'd; this
Whore-son Bawd has changed Countries, embarked, and carried off the Girls, and
I find I'm a Conjurer. This Devil's Bird too, has invited my Master to a Dinner
here; and I think I had best stay his Coming. If I light of the Priestess, I'll
enquire of her, whether she can give me any further account of this Business;
I'll be as certain as I can.


Very well; at the next Door to the Temple you'd have me knock, and desire a
little Water.


Whose Voice is that?


Bless me! Who's that? Whom do I see?


Is't Ampelisca, that comes from the Temple?


Isn't it Tracalio, Pleusidippus's Servant?


'Tis she.


'Tis the same. -- Trachalio, good morrow.


And to you, Ampelisca. -- How came you here?


By a miserable Chance, and undeservedly too.


I hope better things.


A wise Person ought to say and talk nothing but Truth. -- But Prithee now,
where's your Master Pleusidippus?


Pshaw, as tho he wan't within there.


Really, neither he, nor any one else came hither.


He is not come, then?


You say very true.


Which is none of my way, Ampelisca. -- But how forward's Dinner?


Prithee, what Dinner?


Why, your Sacrifice Dinner, you're to have here.


What Dream's this, pray now?


Faith, your Master Labrax invited mine to a Dinner here to Day.


Troth, 'tis a mighty surprise to me. If he has cheated both Gods and Men, he
has done like a Bawd as he is.


Is there no Sacrifice then, neither for you nor my Master?


You may swear 't.


How came ye here then?


Why, the Priestess took us in, both me and Palestra too, in a great Fright,
extreme Danger, and destitute of all Succour.


Pray, is Palestra here too, my Master's Mistress?


Yes indeed.


Dear Ampelisca, you've told me the pleasantest News in the World. -- But I long
mightily to know what Danger you've run thorough.


Why, honest Trachalio, our Ship was cast away last light.


How, cast away? -- What a Fib was that?


Prithee, didn't ye hear, how Labrax would have shipped us away underhand for
Sicily, and had got all his Goods aboard? They're all lost now.


God a mercy, honest Neptune; ne'er a Gamester of 'm all has half the Cunning.
Faith, 'twas an excellent Cast; 'thas quite gammon'd the Rascal. -- But where's
the poor Devil now?


Dead drunk, of my Conscience. For the God invited him last Night to a Tub of
Roaring Liquor; and, troth, I believe the Whore's-bud has drunk more than he
could bear.


O how I could hug thee, dear Ampelisca! you're a Sweet, and charming
Creature. -- But pray, how escaped you, and Palestra?


I'll tell ye. -- When we saw the Ship running full upon a Rock, all in a
fright, we leaped into the Boat, and straight untied the Rope. While the rest
looked dismally on, the Storm parted us from the Ship to the right. All the
long Night, we poor Wretches were most desperately tossed by the Winds and Waves,
till just at Morning, we were thrown half dead a shore.


I know 'tis like Neptune; he's a plaguy hard Custom-Master, and staves all
prohibited Goods.


O hang your sweet Crops.


And thine, my little Rogue. -- I formerly smelt out the Trick this Dog was
playing, and often forewarned y' of it. I think I had best send for Gown and
Fur-Cap, and set up for a Fortune-teller.


Since you fore-knew't, how bravely did you and your Master take care to
prevent it?


What could he have done?


Done, quoth a, for the Person he loved? He should have watched her Night and
Day, and been always upon Duty. But I see your Master's Care and Love for his
Mistress, may tally together.


Why so?


Nay the Matter's plain.


Po, don't ye see, when People go to the Bath, though they be ne'er so careful
o'their Clothes, they're often snapped up? Th'Owner knows n't whom to susepct:
The Thief has his Eye upon the Owner; but the de'el a bit does the other know
the Thief. -- But bring me to Palestra: Where is she?


Go into the Temple there; and you'll find her crying and sobbing like a Child.


I'm sorry for that. -- What's the matter with her?


I'll tell ye. -- She's mightily concerned for Labrax's taking away a Casket of
hers; for there she had something to discover her Parents by, and she fears
'tis quite lost.


Where was it put?


Aboard the Ship. This Rogue had secured it in a Port-mantle, to put her beyond
a possibility of finding her Parents.


O abominable! to keep her a Slave, when she ought to be free?


She believes 'tis sunk to the bottom of the Sea, together with the Ship, and all
Labrax's Gold and Silver. Now I fancy some one has dived for it, and got it out.
The poor Creature's in a lamentable condition for the loss of her Things.


'Tis the best way then to go to her, comfort her up, and keep her from
fretting so. I've known a great many People who have found Relief when they
ne'er expected it.


And I, those who have expected it, and have found none.


In those Cases, Patience is the best Remedy. -- I'll go to her, if you've no
occasion for my Assistance.


Ay, go.


I'll go beg a little Water at the next House, as the Priestess ordered; for
she tells me if I ask in her Name, they'll give me't without Scruple. I think I
ne'er saw a Person more deserving of the Favour of Gods and Men, than this good
old Priestess. How handsomely, generously, honestly, and freely, did she
entertain us! When we were in Fears, Want, Wet, forsaken, and ready to perish,
she took care of us as though we had been her own Children. How ready she is too,
to heat the Water to wash us withal! -- Now I'll go ask for some, that I might
n't make her stay. --


Who's that batters our Doors so incivilly?


A Friend.


Hah, What luck's here? -- 'S bobs, as I hope to breath, a sinug-fac'd little
Rogue.


Good morrow t'ye, young Man.


And to thee, my pretty young Woman.


I come to beg one Kindness --


Which I'd grant ye, if ye came at Midnight; but now I haven't the convenience
of supplying your Wants. -- -- What say thou, my feat little Chuck?


How now? Methinks you're a little too free though.


Bless me! the very Picture of Venus! What sparkling Eyes! What a Shape! What a
fine black Complexion! I meant, a lovely brown! What Bubbies! What sweet Lips
are those!


I'm not for every one's turn; therefore stand off.


What not one gentle Kiss, my pretty sweet Rogue?


When I'm more at leisure, I may allow ye to toy a little. But now I must have
an Answer, ay or no, to what I came for.


What would ye have then?


This Bucket of mine, shows clearly what I'd have.


And this Phiz of mine, shows as clearly what I'd have.


The Priestess of Venus sent me hither for a little Water.


I'm just like a Courtier, you'll ne'er obtain any thing without a plaguy deal
of waiting. The Well's deep and dangerous; and not a drop you get, without a
hundred fine Words and Caresses.


Why are you so sparing of your Water to me, which you give every Stranger
gratis?


And why are you sparing of your Favours' to me, which you give every Citizen
gratis.


Come, my Dear, I'll not stand for once. --


O rare, I'm ravished! She calls me Dear, too. -- -- Thou shalt have Water; I
won't be loved for nothing. -- Give me the Bucket.


Here. -- Prithee, make haste.


Stay. I'll be here in the turning of a Hand, my Honey.


What Excuse shall I make to the Priestess, for staying so long? -- Sicilian
Boarder? I was in good hopes they were both drowned in the Sea. These are new
Plagues, we ne'er looked for. -- But why don't I run into the Temple, and tell
Palestra this News, that we may've time to take Sanctuary at the Altar, before
this old Devil come and take us? -- I'll make haste, for this was a sudden
Thought.


Bless me! I ne'er could have thought I should have found so much pleasure in
drawing Water. How merrily did I go to it! Methought the Well not half so deep
as 'tus'd to be; I drew it with so much ease. -- But without Flattery, I was a
great Owl for not falling in love before now. Here's the Water, my little Fubs
ye? I'd have ye as civil to me, as I to you, that I may love ye the better. --
Where art, my Duck? -- Here, take thy Water. -- Where art thou? -- 'Sbud, she's
in love with me, I believe; for the pretty Jilt has skulked out of the Way. --
Whereabouts art? Won't ye take your Bucket? Where are ye? -- Come, you've
carried the Jest far enough; take the Bucket, and be serious. -- Where have ye
hid your self. -- Ptolemocratia, take in your Bucket here; a young Woman
brought it to me, but I can't tell who. -- I find I must march in with it my
self. I shall have a fine time on it, if I must be bound to draw Water for all
Comers and Goers.


If a Man has a mind to be a Wretch, and a Beggar as long as he lives, let him
trust his Life and Fortune to Neptune's Hands: If he has any thing to do with
him, he shall be sure to be sent home in this sweet Pickle. Ah, Liberty,
thour't a rare Goddess too, thou ne'er go to Sea with a Hero. But where's my
delicate Boarder, who has ruined me? -- O here he lags behind.


Plague on ye, Labrax, where do ye run so fast? 'Sbud, I can ne'er keep pace with
ye.


Ah would ye had rotted upon the Gallows in Sicily, before I laid Eyes on ye;
you that brought all these Plagues upon my Head.


And would I had starved in a Dungeon, the day I came within your Doors. Pray
Heaven, you may ever be plagued with such Guests as I.


When I took y' into my House, certainly Beelzebub attended ye. Why did I listen
to such a Rascal? Why was this Voyage? And why did I venture a Shipboard; where
I've lost more than ever I was worth?


Nay, Faith, I don't wonder the Ship was cast away, when 'twas laden with such
Ill gotten Goods, and a Villain to boot.


'Twas you ruined me with your damned wheedling Tongue.


I'm sure, 'twas a more fatal Supper to me, than ever Thyestes's, and Tereus's
was to them.


O, I dye; -- Sick at Heart! -- Pray hold my Head.


Faith, would ye had spewed your Guts out.


Ah! Palestra, and Ampelisca, where are ye now?


At the bottom of the Sea, I suppose, to dine Fishes.


Now may I go starve, for giving Ear to your Lying Rodomantades.


Nay, y' ought to thank me; before ye were a fresh raw Fellow, now I've
seasoned your Understanding, old Fool.


Would the Devil had ye for a Rogue.


And you too: I'm sure I made broad signs to have him come for ye.


Lamentable! Was ever Mortal in a worse Condition than I?


Yes, I'm in a worse by half.


How so?


Because I ne'er deserved it; you did.


O Reeds, Reeds, I envy your Happiness, that always preserve your dryness, in
the middle of the Water.


Faith, I tremble like one ready to engage the Enemy; and my Jaws do so quake,
that my Words break out like flashes of Lightning.


O Neptune, thy Baths are as cold as Charity; for since I got out of your
Clutches, I'm almost frozen. This God can't afford one Brandy-shop in all his
Dominions, but keeps nothing but salt and cool Liquors.


What a happy Life have these Smiths, who are ever at the Fire, and always warm?


O for a Ducks Life, say I; that comes out of the Water as dry as it goes in.


I fancy, I should make an excellent Snap-Dragon.


How so?


Because I chatter my Teeth so nobly. -- The truth on it is, I deserve to be
sows'd as I have been.


Why?


For venturing to Sea with such a Rascal, whose Villainies alone raised all this
Tempest.


'Twas your damned Project; you gulled my into a belief of getting the Devil
and all by Women in your Country, and told me it would rain Money there.


Ye sharking Brute, did ye think to swallow up all Sicily at a mouthful?


Ah, what Shark has swallowed up my Portmantle, and all my Gold and Silver that
was in it?


The very same, I believe, that swallowed my Purse full of Silver, that was in
the Bag^,


Alas, I'm reduced to this single Waistcoat, and shabby Coat. -- Oh, undone,
undone!


Then let's form a new Company; for now we may go share and share like.


Were my young Women but safe, there would be some hopes still. -- Now If Mr.
Pleusidippus should find me, who ga' me earnest for Palestra, he'll trounce me
damnably.


Why d' ye howl so, Blockhead? You'll ne'er be in debt, as long as you keep a
Tongue that will swear any thing.


I wonder in my Heart, why these two Girls should cry so, and embrace the
Statue of Venus in the Temple. The poor Creatures are mightily afraid of some
Body, and talk of being tossed all Night long, and thrown ashore this morning.


Prithee, Friend, where are those you talk of?


Here in the Temple.


How many are there?


As many as you and I added together.


Certainly, they're mine.


Certainly, I can say nothing to that.


What manner of Girls are they?


Plaguy handsome. -- Faith, I could manage 'em both tightly, with the help of a
Cup or two.


Girls, say ye?


Say? I say you're plaguy impertinent: Therefore go look, if you please.


Sure ^ough, honest Charmides, they're my Girls.


Confound ye for a Dog, be it so or no.


I'll go strait in.


To Hell if you please.


Prithee, honest Fellow, show me some place to sleep in.


You may sleep where you please here, 'tis all common, and no Man will pretend
a Title to your Bed.


You see I've ne'er a dry Thread about me; pray let m'into your House. Lend me
some other Cloths, while mine are a drying; and I shall be bound to pray for
ye.


I don't care if I gi'ye this Frock, m'own Coat and cover in rainy Weather. --
Let me see your Cloths, and I'll warrant ye dry 'em for ye.


For shame! Arn't ye content t'ha'the Sea wash all away, but you must be for
the same sport at Land too?


Be washed, and powdered too, I caren't a Straw: I'll not trust ye without
Money. You may sweat, freeze, be sick, or well, I'll receive no outlandish Guest
within our Doors. We've had enough from them already.


Gone already? -- Sure this Fellow's some Kidnapper by his want o'Pity. But why
stand I here in this woeful Pickle? I'll enter the Temple, and sleep out this
Debauch, that went so damnably against my Stomach. Old Neptune put upon us with
his Water, as though it had been Wine of the best; and thought t'ha' split our
Paunches with Salt Cups. In short, had he proceeded in his Entertainment, he
might have laid us asleep; however, he has sent us home staggering. -- Now I'll
go see what the Merchant, my Pot-Companion, is doing of.


TIs a Wonder to see what Pastime the Gods make with us Mortals; and what a
parcel of wonderful Dreams they send us: They won't suffer us to be at rest,
though we're asleep. What a strange misshapen Dream had I this Night? Methought, I
saw an Ape climbing a Swallows Nest, to catch the young ones, but could not come
at it for its life. Upon that, the Ape, methought, came begging to me to help
it to a Ladder. I presently made Answer, that Swallows are of the Progeny of
Philomel and Progne; and prayed it not to hurt any of my Country. Upon which,
the Ape grew fiercer, seemed to threaten great Mischiefs, and summoned me into
Court. At last, methought, in a great rage, I can't tell how, I took the
mischievous Beast about the middle, and clapped it into Chains. Now can't I
imagine what to make of this Dream, nor what to gather from it. --


-- Oh, Cyrenian People, your Assistance here; -- help, good Country-men,
Friends, and all the Neighbours, help the Distressed, I beseech ye, and punish
the worst of all Rogueries; -- lest Innocence should be overpowered by
Villains, so notorious for their Crimes! -- O punish Rogues, and reward the
Honest; and let us live by the Laws, not Oppression! -- Make haste to the
Temple here; -- once more I beg your Assistance; all who are nigh, and within
call. Succour them, who, according to the ancient Custom, have fled to Venus,
and her Priestess for Protection! Nip this unjust Violence in the Bud, before
it reaches any of you.


What disturbance is this?


I adjure you by these Knees, old Gentleman, who ever you are, to --


Let my Knees alone, and tell me what's the matter, and why this Hubbub?


Let me pray and beg of ye, as ye hope for a good Crop of Herbs, and a
plentiful Harvest of Plants, with a good and safe Voyage to Capoua, and as y'
hope ne'er to be blink-ey'd, as long as you've a day to live, --


Are ye mad?


-- And as ye hope for a good store o'Seed for next Year, good Sir, don't
refuse your Assistance, to him who begs of ye.


I adjure you too, by your Legs, Shanks and Sides, as ye' hope for a good Crop
of Birch, and a plentiful Harvest of Lashes, to tell me the occasion of this
Hubbub.


Why are your Wishes bad, when mine were all good?


So were mine too, when I wished for your deserts.


Let that pass, Sir.


Well, what's the business?


Two poor Innocent Girls in the Temple want your help; where they're
notoriously abused contrary to all the Laws and Privileges of the Place. Then
the Priestess her self is treated after a most Inhuman manner.


Who dares offer Violence to the Priestess of Venus? But what Girls are these?
And what Injuries offered them?


Patience, Sir, and I'll tell ye. -- At present they hang about the Statue of
Venus; now there's a most impudent Rascal who would needs pluck 'em away by
main force, whereas they're both born free.


What sacrilegious Fellow's that?


A cheating, wicked, murdering, perjured, lawless, impudent, prosigate Villain;
to sum up all, a Bawd: What need I say worse? --


In good Faith, one who deserves to be stoned.


A Dog, who had the Insolence to take the Priestess by the Throat.


As I live he shall pay sauce for that. -- Turbalio, and Sparax, where are ye?


Pray, Sir, go in, and help the poor Creatures.


I see I needn't call twice. -- Follow me. --


Go, pluck out his Eyes, and make Cats Meat of 'em.


Drag him by the Heels like a Hog.


They make a confounded Bustle within. -- I fancy they've curried the Bawd's
Coxcomb. I'd give any thing t'ha' this Rascals Teeth beaten down his Throat. --
But hold, here come the poor Girls, in sad fright from the Temple.


Just now, are we destitute of all Help, Succour and Defence; we can neither
see hopes of Relief, nor know which way to take, our Fears have brought us to
such a miserable pass. What Outrage, and Injustice have we met with from our
wicked Master within! who shamefully beat down the good old Priestess, used her
most barbarously, and dragged us both from the Statue. -- Considering the sad
condition we're in, we had better die; for when one's in Misery, Death's the
best Remedy.


What's the matter? What Complaints are these? Why don't I comfort 'em up? --
O, Palestra!


Who's that?


And Ampelisca!


Prithee, who is't?


Who are ye, that names us?


Turn your Eyes, and you'll soon see.


Is't you, my hopes?


Peace, pluck up a good Heart, I say.


Then pray take care, if it be possible, there be no violence offered us; for
that will force me t'use Violence upon my self.


Prithee, you're too fearful.


Don't pretend to comfort us only with a few Words.


If you don't stand up, and defend us, we're both undone, for I'm resolved to
perish sooner than become a Prey to this old Rascal. -- I confess I've but a
Woman's Heart, when the thoughts of Death come upon me; for really, the fear
o'that, makes me tremble all over.


Tho your condition's none of the best, take Courage however.


Pray, where shall I find it?


Don't be dejected, I say, sit ye both down by this Altar.


Can this Altar be a better Sanctuary for us than Venus's Statue within, from
whence he tore us with all the Violence imaginable?


Do but sit down, I'll secure ye both: This Altar shall be your Castle, and
I'll guard th'Outworks; and under Venus's Banner, bid defiance to the Bawd and
all his Works.


We'll observe your Orders. -- Venus, we poor Wretches, embracing thy Altar,
with Tears and bended Knees, implore your Protection, and Preservation: Punish
those Villains, who profane thy Temple; and let thy Shrine be our Sanctuary,
who suffered so much from Neptune this Night: Refuse us not, nor impute any
Crime to us, for approaching thee in this undecent Habit.


Their Petition's reasonable, and 'tis nothing but Justice to grant it, and to
pardon their presumption; for 'twas fear alone caused it. They know that you
were born out of a Lobster, and therefore can be no Enemy to Cherry Cheeks. --
But here comes the Old Gentleman, our Patron, very luckily.


Come out, you vile Sacrilegious Dog. --


Here, Sir.


Best of all.


We're ready for Execution, Sir: Command M. Bawd but to draw nigh.


Shall a Rascal of no Religion pretend to Sacrifice with us? --


I receive the Affront, but 'tshall be to your Cost.


Dos th'Impudent Cur grumble?


I'm robbed o'my Goods, and my Women ravished out o'my Hands!


Then appeal to the Senate's Determination, whether they be your Slaves, or
Free-born; and whether your Rogueship don't deserve to lay in the ^ail as long as
the Walls hang together.


'Tis none o'my business to stand prating with a beggarly Slave. -- My Business
is with you.


Pray address your self first to him who knows your Worship.


Well, I do then.


So y' ought. -- Do these Girls belong to you?


Yes, they do.


Come on then, touch one of'em with your little Finger, if you dare, Sirrah.


What if I do?


'Sbud, you Dog, I'll toss your Carcase like a Foot-Ball, and kick ye to a
Jelly, you perjured Rogue.


May n't I take my own Goods from the Altar?


No, Sirrah; and that's our Law.


I've nothing to do with your Laws; but I'll straight away with 'em both. I tell
ye, Old Man, if your Mouth waters at one of 'em, pay me down the Ready.


They're Venus's Favourites now.


Let Venus pay for 'em then, and take 'em.


She pay for 'em, Sirrah? -- Hear what I say: Offer the least Violence to 'm,
tho but in jest, I'll give ye such a trimming, that you shall not know your self.
--


You would n't offer Violence?


Dare such a cankered Rascal as you reproach us with Violence?


You Hell-hound, dare you be so impudent to me?


Suppose I'm a Hell-hound, and you the honestest Man alive; these Girls are
free-born ne'rtheless for that.


How free-born?


Ay, Faith, and your own Mistresses too, Grecians both. One of 'em is an
Athenian, of a very good Family.


What's that you say?


That this is free-born of Athens.


My own Country, as I hope to live!


Arn't you a Cyrenian, Sir?


No; I had my Birth, Nourishment, and Education at Athens.


Pray, Sir, then stand by your own Countrywomen.


Ah, my poor Daughter! the sight of this, brings my former Trouble to
remembrance. I lost her at three Years of Age, and if she be living, she's just
such another.


I'm sure I paid honestly for 'em to th'Owner; what care I a Fart whether they
were born at Athens, or Thebes, since they're lawfully become my Slaves?


Pandering Dog, do ye pretend to detain Gentlemen's Daughters, kid-napp'd from
their Parents, and make 'em a Prey to your silly Trade? Who the other is I amn't
be sure, but I know her to be ten times better than your self, you nasty
Carrion.


Prove that, can ye?


Strip then, and our Backs shall be Judge who's most to be trusted. If you have
not more Remembrances on yours, than there's Pins in a Man of War, I'm the
veriest Liar upon the Face of the Earth. After your Skin be shown, mine shall;
and you'll find it so clear, that ne'er a Workman in the Land but will say 'tis
whole and tight enough for a Wine-Bag. -- But why don't I jerk this Dog as long
as I can stand over him? -- Why do ye stare so at 'em? Touch 'em, and out-go
both your Eyes.


Because you say so, I'll have 'em both


Why, what will you do?


By Vulcan's Help, fire 'em out o'their Nests; for he's an Enemy to Venus.


Where goes he?


So ho, within there! -- So ho!


Touch that Door, Sirrah, and, Faith, I'll make ye glad to glean up your
scattered Teeth.


We keep no Fires; for we live all upon dried Figs.


I'll help ye to Fire, if that Steel-Face will strike a Light.


'Sbud, I'll find Fire somewhere.


What will ye do, when ye have found it?


Make a swinging Pile upon the Altar.


What to sacrifice your self?


No, to burn 'em both alive, where they are.


I'd fain see that. And, as I live, I'll catch ye by the Beard, throw y'into
the Fire, and hang y' up, half roasted, for Crows-Meat. -- Now I consider of
't, this must be th'Ape I dreamt of, that would needs take the young Swallows
from their Nest, whether I would or no.


Do ye mind what I say, Sir? -- Good old Gentleman, defend the poor Girls by
main Force, while I go fetch my Master.


Go, and find him out.


But have a special care this Rascal --


He had better hang himself than touch one of 'em, or make the least
Disturbance.


going out of the Court] Take care, Sir.


I'll warrant ye. -- make haste.


Take care too, that this Dog don't give ye the slip: For my Master's bound in a
Bond to deliver this Whore's Bud to the Jailer, upon Forfeiture of a full
Talent.


'Tis now left to your Bawdships discretion, whether you'll choose a good
Beating, or a whole Skin.


I caren't this, for what you say, Old Man. I'll tear 'em from th'Altar by the
Hair o'their Heads, in spite of you, Venus, and Jove himself.


Touch 'em, do.


Rot me, if I don't.


Come then, draw nigh.


Then order your Hang Dogs to draw off.


Towards you, I will.


Faith, I can scarce believe that.


What if they should?


I'd retire. -- But, old Fellow, if I ever catch y' in Town, and don't expose
ye to the whole World, may I never bear the Name of Slave-Merchant.


Do what you please; but in the mean time, offer to meddle with either of 'em,
and you shall be swinged to some tune.


How swinged?


As a villainous Bawd ought to be.


Po, I laugh at your Threats; I'll have 'em both spite of your Teeth.


Lay a hand on 'em.


That I will, In Faith.


Do then: You know what follows. -- Turbalio, run quickly for a Couple of
Cudgels.


Cudgels?


Strong ones. -- make haste.


Now, Sirrah, I shall give ye your due, or I'm mistaken.


O lamentable! I lost my Head-piece too, in the Ship; if I had but that, 'wou'd
secure my Skull. --


No, Sirrah. -- O best of all! Here comes the Fellow with his Cudgels.


Faith, they make my Ears tingle.


Sparax, take you the other Cudgel. -- One of ye, stand on the right, and the
other on the left side of the Altar. So, keep close, and mind what I say. If
the Rogue offers to lift up a Finger against 'em, give him his load so as he
shall not be able to find the way home, or I'll hang y' up both by the heels. If
he calls one of 'em, do you answer; and if he offers to be marching, break both
his Legs with your Clubs.


What will ye keep me Prisoner too?


I've said enough. When your Servant's come back, who is gone for his Master,
come both of ye in: Observe exactly what I tell ye.


Bless me! Of my Conscience, in this short time, the Temple's transformed from
that of Venus to Hercules, by the old Man's erecting his two Monuments, with
Clubs in their Hands. As I hope to live, I known't where to hide my Head, for
both Sea and Land are conspired against me. -- Palestra!


What would ye have?


Hang ye, there's an ill meaning in it. Marry. The Palestra that answers, is
none of mine -- Hark ye, Ampelisca!


Have a care ye don't pull an old House about your Ears.


These Lubberly Dogs advise me well however. --


Not for us.


Nor for my sides neither?


Not if you be cautious.


What should I be cautious of?


Of having your Bones broken.


Good Boys, let me go.


Go, if you please.


By Jove, that's honestly said; and I thank ye for your kindness. But I had
rather stay by my Slaves.


Then stay.


Faith, my Affairs are in a damned Condition. But I'm resolved to lay a close
Siege to these Girls to day.


-- The rascally Merchant offer violence to my Mistress, and tear her from the
Altar by force?


Yes, Sir.


Why didn't ye kill him upon the spot?


I had ne'er a Sword.


A Club, or a Stone should have served then.


What, stone a Man like a Dog?


Yes, such a Rascal as he.


'Sdeath, I'm undone to rights! Yonder comes Pleusidippus too. He'll have a
confounded brush at my Coat.


Were both the Girls upon the Altar, when you left 'em?


They're there still.


Who looks after 'em now.


An honest old Gentleman, a Stranger to me, who lives next door to the Temple:
He and his Servants, have done their best to protect 'em: I left 'em in his
Hands.


Show me the Rogue, Labrax: Where is he?


Good morrow, dear Sir.


Hang your good morrows: -- Now, Sirrah, choose quickly, whether you'll go to
Jail the usual way, or be dragged by the Heels.


I'll choose neither.


Trachalio, run quickly to the Sea-side, and desire my Friend there, to meet
me' at the Town-Gate, and help to carry this Dog to Prison; then come back, and
look after this Girls, I'll have this Devils-bird before the Judge immediately.


Come, Sirrah; come before the Judge.


For what Crime?


What Crime! Didn't you take earnest for a Girl, and then carry her quite away?


I didn't carry her away.


Will you Lie, Sirrah?


Truly, I only embarked her; alas, I could not carry her away. -- I promised you
to meet y' at the Temple of Venus. Am I worse than my word? Am I not here?


The Judge shall determine that: That's the word for all. -- Come along,
Rascal.


O help, good Charmides, help! I'm arrested here.


Who calls me there?


Don't you see I'm hurried away, vi armis?


I do, and am glad of't withal my Soul.


Won't ye help to rescue me?


Who is't forces ye so?


Young Pleusidippus.


Ay, you may bare it patiently; you'd better by half go willingly. I'll warrant
ye, you'll meet what a great many wish for.


What's that?


A Reward according to your Deserts.


Prithee come along with me.


That's like your Rogueship: You're going to Jail, and desire me to go along
with ye. -- What, do ye hang an Arse?


O, undone!


That's it I'd have. -- My dear Palestra, and you Ampelisca, stay where you
are, till I come back.


Truly, Sir, I think 'tis far safer for 'em to go in with us, till your return.


Very well; I thank ye.


O I'm robbed here!


Who are the Robbers?


Beat him off.


O, good Palestra!


Come along, Hang-Dog.


Honest Boarder!


I'm none of your Boarder; I renounce your Bed and Board.


What do ye throw my off at last?


Yes, I've enough of your Salt Meats, I thank


Then the Devil rot your Bones.


And your Corps in Prison. --


I Vow, I'm glad withal my Heart, that I should help these poor Girls. I'm
their Protector at present; and, troth, they're both young, and wondrous
pretty. But my jealous prying Wife watches me on all sides, for fear I should
be too sweet upon 'em. -- But I wonder what's become of our Man Gripus, who
went out a Fishing last night: Faith, he'd have been wiser had he kept his Bed:
Certainly, he must have lost his Labour, and his Tackling too; the Wind has been
so high ever since. By the roughness of the Sea, I may venture to fry all his
Fish in my bare Hand. -- But hold, my Wife calls me to Dinner; I'll go, but I
shall have my Ears deafn'd with her foolish prattle.


Thanks to my old Patron Neptune, King of the Salt-fish Regions, for sending me
home so well accoutred from his Dominions, and thus richly laden; and for
preserving the little Boat that helped me to this lucky new sort o'Fish, when
the Sea ran so high. Faith, 'twas a wonderful strange Bout, and the best that
could be; for the de'el a Fish caught I to day, but what's in this Net. I rose
carefully at Mid night, preferred Interest to snoring and sleeping, hazarded
my Carcase in a Storm, to relieve my Master's Wants, and m'own Servitude. A
lazy Rogue's good for nothing: I hate those Cattle as I do the Plague. If a
Fellow has a Mind to have his business go forward, he must be up and be doing,
and not lye lolling in his Bed for his Master's Call: For such as these, gain
nothing but a Jerking. Now I, who am careful, have happened o'that, which, if I
please, will keep me from all Care. -- This I found in the Sea: What e'r's in it
'tis plaguy weighty: Faith, I believe 'tis all Gold; and, what's worth all,
ne'er a Soul to come in for a Snack. -- Now, my rare Gripus, is the critical
Minute for the Magistrates to make thee a great Man. Now, for my Policy, and
Contrivance: I'll go cunningly, and slily, to my Master, and offer him a little
Money for my Freedom: After I've got that, I'll immediately purchase House and
Land, and buy Slaves; then, send out large Ships to trade to Foreign Parts of
the World, and be as great as a King. I'll have a Royal Sun for Pleasure, like
the K -- of F -- and sail about from Port to Port. When my Nobility and
Splendour begin t'appear in the World, I'll build a vast great City, and call it
from my own Name, Gripsburg, for the Memory of my Illustrious Fame, and
Immortal Actions; and there will I erect a great and potent Monarchy. -- Faith,
I've great Designs in my Head; but first and foremost; let me hide this
Portmantle. -- After all, this Monarch here, must dine to Day with a Brown
George, and only Salt and Vineager Sauce.


Stay, Friend.


What for?


Only t'unshacle your Rope, that hangs at your heels.


Prithee, Friend, let it alone.


Faith, I must help ye; for a good turn's never thrown away upon a good Man.


I tell ye, Fellow, I've no Fish, for there has been nothing but stormy Weather
since yesterday, therefore don't expect any. Don't you see I've a wet Net, and
nothing in it?


I want no Fish, but only a little serious Discourse.


Po, I hate your baiting Impertinence, who ever you are.


I must n't part wi'ye so. -- Stay, Man.


I'll break your Neck. -- Why a Pox d' ye hold me?


Hear me a little.


Not a Word.


Faith, but you must.


Another Time, as long as you please.


Oh, but 'tis a Matter of great Importance, and must n't be put off.


Speak then; what is't?


But does no Body dog us?


What's that to me?


O much. -- Can y' advise m'in one point?


What Point? Prithee be quick.


I'll tell ye, upon Promise of not betraying me.


I promise I won't betray you, who ever you are.


Observe then: I lately discovered a Theft, and knew the Owner of the stolen
Goods. Whereupon, I goes straight to Mr. Thief, and offers him this Proposal: I
know the Owner, says I, o'your stolen Goods; and if you'll gi'me a share, I'll
ne'er discover't to him. The Fellow gave no Answer. Now what think ye do I
deserve? Half parts? I'll be judged by you.


Ay, Faith, and more too; or I'd discover the Rogue to th'Owner.


I'll follow your Advise: Now take notice, this all belongs to your Case.


Why, how can that be?


I knew the Owner of that Portmantle this long time.


What say ye?


And I know how it was lost.


And I how it was found; and the honest Man that found it, who now is become
Master of't. In good Faith, 'tis nothing to you, to know the present Owner, as
I do; nor to me, to know the former, as you do. -- I'll part with it to no Man,
therefore pray don't flatter your self.


What not to the Owner, if he comes?


There's no Owner but my self: I say, don't fool your self, for I caught it a
fishing.


Did ye so?


And is there any Fish which don't belong to me? All that I take, are m'own,
and I do what I please with 'em, no man pretending to take 'em away, or come in
for a Share. I sell 'em in open Market, as my own proper Goods. For sure the
Sea's common to all Men.


I grant it: And why should n't I come in for a common share of't, since it
comes out of a common Place?


O Impudence, Impudence! If that be Law, poor Fishermen may go hang themselves:
For when they carry their Fish to Market, the de'el a bit would the People buy,
but all come flocking in for their Shares, pretending they were caught in the
common Liberty.


How, brazen Face? What compare Portmanteaus to Fish? Is there no difference
think ye?


'Tis n't i'my Power to catch what I please: When ever I throw in my Tackling,
all's Fish that comes to the Net. And what's caught, is mine, in spite of any
Man.


No by Jove, if you catch a Bag instead of a Fish.


A fine Foolosopher!


Good Mr. Sorcerer, did y'ever kn^ a Man carry a Fish to Market called a
Portmantle? You musn't think to follow as many Trades as you please. You would
n't be Bag-maker and Fisherman at the same time, would ye? Either show me a
Fish called a Portmantle, or you carry nothing off without Scales, and that
isn't bred in the Sea.


Prithee, Fellow, did ne'er hear of a Portmantle-Fish?


You Dog, there's no such Fish.


Gadzooks, but there is tho? and you'll give a Fisherman leave to know his own
Trade. I confess 'tis a very scarce Fish, and very few of 'em are caught upon
our Coasts.


You'd as good say nothing: Dost think t'impose upon me, Rogue? -- -- What
Colour is it of, pray?


There are very few o'this Colour. Others are red; when they grow big, they
turn Black and Blue.


Very well. -- Faith, if you have not a care, I shall change you to a
Portmantle-Fish; make your Sides red first, then black and blue.


What unlucky Rogue have I happened on to day?


We stand wrangling and lose Time: Consider to whom you'll put the Business.


To the Portmantle.


Say ye so, Goodman Fool?


God bu'y, Sir Solomon.


You must n't carry it off so, without putting it into a third Man's Hands, and
leaving it to others determination.


Prithee, art mad?


As a March. Hare.


And I crazy, but not enough to part from my Goods.


Speak another Word, and I'll make Mustard of your Brains.


Let my alone, or I'll squeeze out all the Blood of your Belly like a Sponge. If
you touch it, I'll take ye by the Heels, and dash ye as dead as a Herring. --
Come, I'll fight wi'ye.


Hang fighting, now we may divide the Spoil.


You'll get nothing but a broken Head here; therefore don't provoke me. -- --
Now I'll be gone.


I shall make your Ship tack about; therefore stay.


If you be at the Head, I'll keep at the Steerage. -- Let go the Lines, Rogue.


Shall I so? Do you let go the Portmantle.


By George, you shall not be a Sowce the better for what's in it.


Your denial argues nothing, unless you give me a Share, put it to reference, or
into other Hands.


What I caught at Sea?


And I found at Land.


At the Price o'my Trouble, Pains, Nets, and Boat.


If th'Owner should come, should I, who see you take it, be counted a less
Thief than you?


No, without doubt.


Stay, Hang-dog. -- By what Law must I be the Thief, and not the Sharer? make
that out.


I don't understand your City Laws, not I; but only I know it belongs all to
me.


And I know it belongs as much to me.


Hold a little, I've found out a Trick to prevent your being either Thief or
Sharer.


What's that?


Let me go quietly one way, and go you another; you shall say nothing, and I'll
give nothing; you shall be secret, and I'll be silent. I think 'tis the best
and fairest Project in the World. Hah, Boy?


Will you make me no Proposals?


I have already: Those are, To let go the Lines, and be gone, and to leave all
Impertinencies.


Stay, and let me make Proposals too.


Prithee, make the best of your Way, and be gone.


Are y'acquainted hereabouts?


With my Neighbours I am.


Whereabouts live ye?


O, a vast way up into the Fields.


Will ye put the Business to the Man of this House?


Let go the Rope a little, and I'll think and consider of't.


Well then.


Good, good! Things go rarely: This rich Prize is every bit m'own. The Foolish
Fellow carries me to my own Dung-hill, and refers all to my own Master. I'll be
sworn, he'll ne'er give three ha'pence from his own Servant. This poor Devil sure
knows n't what he's about. --


What should you do else?


Tho my Conscience tells me 'tis my Right, I'd rather do so, than give my self
the Trouble of beating ye.


Now I like ye.


Tho you summons me before an unknown Judge, if he does Justice, he's a
notable, though unknown Man; if not, he's a most notably unknowing Man.


-- In faith, seriously, my poor Girls, tho I should be glad to do you any
Service you can desire o'me, yet I'm miserably afraid my jealous Wife should
thrust m'out a doors; pretending that I bring my Misses under her Nose,
t'affront her. -- Therefore, pray retire to the Altar, or I must my self.


We're in a miserable Condition.


I'll protect ye; fear nothing. -- Sentry by the Door.


O Master, your humble Servant.


How now, Gripus; how is't?


Is he your Servant?


Yes, and no disgrace to him neither.


I've nothing to do wi'ye then.


Pray, be marching then.


Pray answer me, Sir. Is he your Servant?


Yes.


So then, best of all! If so, I'm your Servant once more.


And I yours. -- Arn't you the Person, who, a while ago, went to look for his
Master?


The same, Sir.


What's your business now?


But is he certainly your Servant?


I tell ye, Yes.


That's as good as could be, if it be so.


Why, what's the matter?


He's a great Rogue.


What has the Rogue done t'ye?


The Dog deserves to have his Legs broke.


What's the matter? What Contest is this between ye?


I'll tell ye, Sir.


No, I will first.


I think, I should, since I'm the Plaintiff.


If you're wise, go plant your self somewhere else.


Observe, Gripus, and be silent.


Must he speak first?


Peace, Sirrah. -- Begin.


Will you hear a stranger before your own servant?


How hard 'tis to stop his Mouth! -- As I was a telling ye, the Slave-Merchant,
that you drove from the Temple, had lost a Portmantle, and this Fellow has got
it.


I have it not.


Shall not I believe my Eyes?


Would they were both out. --


The Concern is, by what title you hold it, whether a lawful one or no?


Had I got it on dry Land, you might lawfully hang me: But if I caught it at
Sea, why is't more yours than mine?


He equivocates; the Business is as I tell ye.


And how's that?


If he's your Servant, beat him into better manners, and let the Accuser speak
first.


You'd have him serve me as your Master dos you, would ye? Though yours be good
at that sport, mine is not.


There, Boy, you've out-done him. --


To speak sincerely, I neither require a share in the Portmantle, nor pretend
any right to it. But there's a Casket in it, belonging to this Girl here, whom I
told ye was free born.


You mean her, whom you say is my Countrywoman?


The same: In that Casket, now in the Portmantle, are her Play-things she had
when she was a Child. They'll do him no good; and if he restores 'em, 'twill be
a means to find out the poor Girls Parents.


He shall restore 'em; be satisfied.


Gadzooks, I'll deliver up nothing.


I desire nothing but the Casket, and the Playthings within it.


Suppose they're all made of Gold?


What signifies it to you, whether they be Gold, or Silver, you shall have
Weight for Weight in kind.


Let me see your Gold then, and you shall see the Casket.


Sirrah, beware of a beating, and hold your Tongue. --


First, I must beg you take pity of these poor Girls, if this Portmantle should
prove the Slave-Merchants, as I suspect. 'Tis only a Conjecture, I'm not
certain 'tis his, --.


How the Rogue goes to hook him in!


Prithee, don't interrupt me. -- If it belongs to this Rascal, I was talking
of, these Girls can tell: Command him to show it openly.


How! show it openly?


Why, there can be no harm in that, Gripus.


'Sbud, 'twill do the greatest harm in the World.


Why so?


Because if I do, they'll infallibly say they know it.


You suspicious Cur, do ye think every Body as great a Rogue as your self?


I can bare all this, as long as my Master's of my side.


But he's gone over to the other, and that the Casket will witness.


Hold your Tongue, Gripus. --


I have already; but, if you didn't rightly understand, I'll tell y' again. --
-- As I was saying, these Girls are both born free; one was kidnapped very
young from Athens. --


Pray, what's this to the Portmantle, whether they be free, or not free?


You Rogue, you'd have me begin again, and so spin out a whole day in the
Relation.


Cease this ill Language, and answer me directly to what I ask.


There should be a small Casket of Ozier in the Portmantle, where the Play
things are, which she had whenfirst spirited away, and by which she might
discover her Parents, as I said.


Would the Devil and his Damn had ye. What say ye, Sorcerer? The Women are both
dumb; arn't they of Age to speak for themselves?


They're quiet as Lambs, for a silent Woman has always the whip Hand of a
Talker.


Then, Faith, by your discourse, you're neither Man nor Woman.


Why so?


Because you can neither talk nor be silent to any purpose. -- Pray, Sir, shall
I never speak?


Speak another word, Sirrah, and I'll crack your Fools Pate.


As I said before, Sir, do but command your Servant to deliver up the Casket;
if he requires any thing for the finding, he shall have it; and let him take the
rest of the things besides.


O, now you're in another tune, when you see 'tis my right: Just now, you came
swoop for half Parts.


So I am still.


So I've seen a Kite come swoop at a Chick, but snapped short though.


Will nothing but Blows stop your mouth?


Let him hold his Tongue, and I will mine; but if he talks, sure I may speak in
my turn.


Gripus, let me see the Portmantle.


I'll trust it in your Hands, upon condition you return it, if none of his
things be there.


I will.


Here, Sir.


Palestra, and Ampelisca, hear what I say. Is this the Portmantle that has your
Casket in it?


'Tis the same.


Hey brave! my business is in a hopeful condition, before she can well see it,
she cries 'tis the same.


I'll make the Business as clear as the Sun: The Casket's made of Ozier: I'll
name ye every thing in it, one after another, before I see 'em. If I be not in
the right, it shall be nothing; you shall take all you find. If I be, pray
then, restore me my Things.


Very well, 'tis nothing but Justice in my Opinion.


Troth, and in mine too.


What if she be a Witch, or a Devil, and can tell every thing that's there,
shall she have 'em for her pains?


She shall have none unless she speaks truth; her Witchcraft shall do her no
good. -- Come, open the Portmantle, that I may know the truth of the business.


-- So; -- There then; -- now 'tis open: -- O, the Devil! Here's the Casket.


Is this it?


Yes, yes. O my dear Parents, I have ye both enclosed there, there lies all my
Wealth, and hopes of discovering ye.


Marry, you'll ne'er come to good, who ever you are, for cramming your Father and
Mother into such a pitiful narrow place.


Gripus, bring it this way: Your Business shall be cleared. -- Now, my Girl,
without stirring from your place, name every thing in the Casket, and how
they're made. Troth if you mistake in the least, and speak ne'er so much truth
after that, you'd as good talk to the Wind.


That's nothing but right.


Far unlike your Worship, who's neither for Right nor Reason.


Now speak, Palestra. -- Gripus, observe, and hold your Tongue.


There are Children's Play-things.


I see 'em.


Troth, I'm felled at the first Blow. -- Hold, Sir, don't show her 'em yet.


What are they? Answer in order.


First, there's a little Sword of Gold, with an Inscription upon it.


Tell me, what is't.


My Father's Name. In another part of the Casket, lies a small two edged Axe of
Gold, marked w^' my Mother's Name. --


Stay. First, tell me your Father's Name on the Sword.


Demones.


Heavens! where are my hopes?


And mine, by Iago.


Prithee, go on.


Softly, Sir. -- Or would you were hanged.


Tell me your Mothers Name on the Axe.


Dedalis.


The Gods have preserved my Happiness.


And damned mine.


She must be my Daughter, Gripus.


So she may for all me. -- [to Trachalio.] Would old Beelzebub had ye, with your
plaguy prying Eyes, and me too, when I drew out the Net, without looking about
a hundred times, to see if the Coast were clear.


Then there's a small two handl'd Dagger of Silver, and a little Sow, --


Go and be hanged, with your Sows and Pigs together.


-- Besides a little golden Bottle, which my Father ga' me of my Birth-day.


'Tis certainly she, I must embrace her. -- Demones and your Mother Dedalis is
within.


O, my dear unexpected Father!


My dear Child; how I joy t'ha' ye in my Arms!


And I, to see your goodness thus rewarded.


Good Boy, take this Portmantle a little, and bring it into the House; come
along.


See the effects of Gripus's Rogueries. -- Honest Sir, I congratulate your good
success.


Come in, my Child, to thy Mother, who can better judge of the Proofs, and is
much more acquainted with the Tokens.


Let's all in, since we're all concerned in the matter.


Come you too, Ampelisca.


I'm almost ravished to see Heaven so favourable t'ye.


Well, I'm the dam'dest Puppy in nature, in finding such a Prize, and not
hiding of't in some cunning hole or other. Faith, I thought as much, that
it would prove a plaguy bitter Business to me, since I found it in such bitter
stormy Weather. Zooks, I do verily believe there's a World of Gold and Silver
in it; and what wiser Course can I take, than to slink away and hang my self; at
least for a while, till this plaguy Sorrow's over.


Heavens! was ever Man more fortunate than I, so unexpectedly to find a
Daughter? Isn't it plain, that when Heaven bestows its Favours, 'tis upon the
account of Men's Pieties? Thus have I accidentally found my poor Girl, beyond
both my hopes and belief; and I intend to bestow her upon an Ingenious young
Gentleman, of a good Family, and my Country-man. I wish some Body would desire
him to come hither. I ordered his Servants to follow me, and step to the Town
for him: I wonder why he dosn't come, for my part. -- I think I had best go to
the Door. -- [He goes to the Door, and looks in.] But what's here to do? My
Wife hugging my Daughter? These Caresses are too formal and tedious. -- [to his
Wife within.] Enough, Wife, leave your kissing, and prapare for a Sacrifice, to
thank our Gods for our Families Increase. We have Lambs, and holy Pigs on
purpose. -- [to the Women within.] Why do ye hinder Trachalio from coming? -- O,
here he is as luckily as may be.


I'll find out my Master, if he be above Ground, and bring him t'ye.


Tell him what good luck has befallen my Daughter; and pray him to leave all
Business, and come hither.


Well.


Tell him, he shall have my Daughter, --


Well.


That I'm acquainted with his Father, and he's my Country-man.


Well.


But make haste.


Well.


While you're a going, we'll provide a Supper.


Well.


Is every thing Well?


Very well. -- Sir, do ye know my request? To remember you promised to procure
my Freedom.


Well.


Persuade my Master, what you can, to perform it.


Well.


Get your Daughter to speak a good word for me; she'll easily obtain it.


Well.


And that I may marry Ampelisca, when I'm free. --


Well.


That my Services may appear to have been grateful t'ye.


Well.


Is every thing Well with you too?


Very well. -- And I thank ye for it. -- But run to the Town, and back again, as
fast as you can.


Well. -- I'll be with you instantly. The mean time, get all things in a
readiness.


Well. -- A duce on him, for his Wells and Waters, he has stuffed my Ears with
nothing else. Whatever I could say, all is Well.


I'd speak a word with ye, Sir, when you're at leisure.


What's the matter, Gripus?


And concerning the Portmantle too. If you know what belongs to your Profit,
secure what Heaven has sent ye.


D' ye think it just to lay claim to what's none of my own?


Didn't I find it in the Sea?


So much the better for him who lost it; but 'tis none of yours the more for
that.


'Tis this Honesty of yours, that makes ye so poor.


O Gripus, take notice, there are a great many Hooks laid to catch Mankind,
which often entangle 'em. And, troth, they're commonly so well baited, that if
any covetous Fool chance to snap at 'em, they're caught, and must pay Sauce for
their greediness. But the Man who carries himself warily, carefully and
cunningly, may long enjoy his well-gotten Goods. I'm persuaded it will be more
for our Profit, to return this Prize to the Owner, than to keep it: And shall I
pretend to keep what, I know, belongs to another Man? That's none of your
Master Demones's ways. Wise Men can never be too cautious in this Case, for
fear they become Partners with their Servants ill Actions. The satisfaction of
returning it to the Owner, is sufficient Reward to me, for the finding of it.


I've often seen the Comedians of the Stage, applauded for the wise and moral
Instructions they taught the People; but when every one's got home, he ne'er
observes 'em.


Go in, and don't be troublesome, or saucy; I'll not give ye a Farthing of't,
don't deceive your self.


Then be it Gold, Silver, or any thing else, Heaven grant it be all consumed to
Ashes.


This same joining with Servants, is the reason we've so many bad ones. If I
harken to his Proposals, I shall become guilty of his Crime. While he imagines
he has a Prize, he's mine himself; so one Prize takes another. -- But I'll in
to the Sacrifice, and then give order for the Supper.


TEll all again, my dear Trachalio, my Deliverer, my Patron, or rather, my
Parent. Has my Palestra found out her Parents?


Yes, Sir.


And is she my Country-Woman?


I think so.


Shall I marry her too?


I imagine so.


Prithee, do ye think her Father will make up the Match to day?


That's my Opinion.


Should I congratulate her Father for the Discovery?


That's my Advice.


And her Mother too?


That's my Advice.


What is't, that you advise?


What you ask.


What's your Advice worth?


Mine? I advise --


Leave advising, and don't be always a Councellor.


That's my Advice.


Shall I run?


That's my Advice.


Or had I better go softly?


That's my Advice too.


Shall I salute her at the first entrance?


That's my Advice.


And her Father too?


'Tis my Advice.


Then, her Mother?


'Tis my Advice.


What then? Shall I embrace her Father at the first entrance?


That's not my Advice.


Nor her Mother?


That's not my Advice.


Nor her self?


'Tis not my Advice.


'Sdeath, the Fellow has changed his Note, and has advised me to a fine
purpose.


You're out of your Wits; come along, Sir.


Where you please, my Patron.


Was ever Mortal in a more miserable Case than I? Pleusidippus has cast me
before the Judges; they 've given him Palestra, and I may go hang my self. I'm
persuaded that all Merchants of my Faculty were born to make the World sport,
every Body's so mightily pleased when they light upon any Misfortune. -- Well,
I'll to the Temple, and take her who is left behind, for she's all the Goods I
have in the World now.


By the Lord Harry, you shall not see Gripus alive at night, if I have not the
Portmantle again.


I'm ready to swoon at the Name of a Portmantle; the very word goes to the Guts
o'me.


This Dog Trac^alio has got his Freedom; but I, who found the rich Prize, am
denied every thing.


Bless me! The Fellow makes me prick up my Ears.


'Sbud, I'll post it up every where in Letters as big as Milstones, That if any
one has lost a Portmantle full of Gold and Silver, let them repair to Gripus.
They shall not carryit off as they think.


Of my Conscience, the Fellow knows of my Portmantle. -- I must board him. Now
Heaven prosper me.


What do ye call my in for? I'll scour the Spit here.


Bless ye, young Man.


And you too, with your bald Pate.


What are y' about?


Scouring this damned Spit.


How fares your Corps?


Why that Question? Are ye a Mountibank?


No, Faith, I'm another sort of Bank.


What then, a Bankrupt?


Thou'st nicked it.


It agrees with your Complexion. -- But what's the matter?


Why, last Night I was cast away, my Ship sunk, and I've lost all I'm worth.


What have ye lost?


A Portmantle, full of Gold and Silver.


Do ye remember what was in it?


What matters that; since all's gone to the bottom of the Sea?


Nothing: Let's talk of something else. -- Suppose I know who found it; I'd
willingly be told the Marks.


There was 800 pieces of Gold in one Purse, and 100 Philips in a little Bag by
it self.


As I live, a noble Prize; I must require a swinging Reward for finding of it.
The Gods are generous, and I shall be damn'dly rich: I see it is his
Portmantle. -- Go on with the rest.


A whole Talent of Silver, in a great Bag; besides, a Basin, an Ewer, a Boat,
and a Goblet.


O living! You were a plaguy rich Fellow!


That same were, is a miserable hard Word, since 'tis gone and past.


Come, what will you give the Party that shall find it, and bring it to ye?
Speak quick; in a twinkling.


Three hundred Pieces.


'Tis three hundred times too little.


Four hundred.


Four hundred Farts.


Five hundred then.


A Fiddle's end.


Six hundred.


You'd as good bid so many Farthings.


I'll give seven hundred.


Have ye swallowed a Fire-Coal, that you can't open your Mouth?


I'll give a thousand then.


Po, you bid nothing.


Not a So^ce more. Go.


But hark ye; troth, if I once go, you find me no more here.


Will a hundred more do?


Sure you nothing but dream.


Prithee, tell me, how much will.


Not to make ye bid twice, a great Talent's the Price, and not a Farthing to be
abated of that! therefore say, Ay, or no.


I see I'm forced to it. -- I'll give it then.


Come hither then. Venus shall be witness of all.


Command what you please.


Lay your Hand upo'th' Altar.


I do.


You must swear by Venus, to --


To do what?


What I dictate t'ye.


Dictate what you please --


Take hold of the Altar.


I do.


Swear to pay me the Money, as soon as you have your Portmantle.


I will.


I do promise here before Venus of Cyrene, if I find the said Portmantle, I
lost in the Ship, together with all the Gold and Silver, therein enclosed, and
it comes safely into my Hands and possession, --


That I will give to this present Gripus -- Lay your Hand upon me, and say
after me.


That I will give to this present Gripus. --


A great talent of Silver. So help me Venus.


If you equivocate, wish Ven^'s Curse to rot your Head and Joints all over. --


If I break my Oath, may Venus send all the Plagues of Bawds upon my Head.


Ay, and tho you keep it. -- Stay here; I'll bring out my old Master t'ye: Be
sure to challenge him with the Portmantle.


Tho he does help me to my Portmantle, the De'el a Farthing shall the Dog get
of me. I'm Master of my own Tongue, and I'll do as I please. -- But mum for
that. Here he comes and the Old Gentleman with him.


Come this way, Sir. But where's this Womanmerchant? -- Hark ye, ho, ho! This
Gentleman has your Portmantle.


I have so, and own it; and if it be yours, you may have it, and all that's
in it, just as you lost it. Take it if it be yours.


O wonderful! 'tis mine. -- Welcome, my dear dear Portmantle.


Is't yours?


D' ye question it? Faith, if it fell into the Hands of Jove, 'tis mine
nevertheless.


There's nothing touched, but only one small Casket, and a few Play-things,
which helped to discover my Daughter?


What Daughter?


Your Palestra is found to be my Daughter.


Truly, Sir, I'm glad of it; and receive an extreme Satisfaction in finding
things fall out so happily on your side.


I can scarce believe your Compliment.


Then, Sir, to show you my Intentions are real, I deliver up all my Right to
your Daughter, without demanding a Farthing of ye.


That's a piece of Generosity indeed.


O dear, Sir, 'tis more yours than mine.


Hark ye, Friend, are ye possessed of your Portmantle?


Yes.


Then make haste.


To do what?


To pay me my Money.


Marry, I'll not pay ye a Souse, nor do I owe y' any.


What Roguery's that? Not owe my any?


No, Faith, not I.


Did n't your swear to me? --


I did swear, and so I will again, if I think fit. Oaths were designed to make
a Man, not to break a Man.


You perjured Dog, pay me the Talent y' owe me.


What Talent do ye demand, Gripus?


He promised me upon Oath, to give me --


'Twas my pleasure to swear: Are you a Magistrate to punish me if I break my
Oath.


Upon what account did he promise this Money?


If I helped him to this Portmantle, he swore to gi'me a great Talent of
Silver.


Get one to go before the Judge wi'me then, where I'll prove your Demands all
Trick and Cheating, and that I'm older than your Worship by 25 Years.


Here's one ready.


I've nothing to say to him.


I'll not part with it thus, till things be a little clear. -- Did you promse
him this Money?


I don't deny it.


What you promised my Servant, belongs to me. Therefore, good Sir, you mustn't
think to sham us off with your Bawdships Legerdemain Tricks.


Sure you think you've to deal with a mere Bubble. Come, down with the Money
fairly, and I'll give it my Master for my Freedom.


Since I've been so civil t'ye, and by my means, your Goods were saved, --


Troth, Sir! 'twas by mine, therefore don't say, by yours.


Hold your Tongue, Fool. --


True, because you defend my Right so well.


It would be ridiculous to defend it wi'the loss of my own.


I'm pretty secure: The Woman - Trader's brought a Peg lower, and that foretells
my Freedom.


He found it, and he's my Slave, therefore I've kept it for ye, and all the
Money safe.


I thank ye for it, and now I find t^re's no Reason to hinder ye of the Talent I
so solemnly promised.


Hark ye, give it me quickly, if you're wise.


Will you never be silent?


You pretend to be my Friend, and 'tis all for your self. But, as I live, you
shall not trick my out o'this, as you did the Portmantle.


Sirrah, speak another Word and I'll cane ye.


Ay, Faith, you may kill me too; but I'll ne'er be quiet, till my mouth's stopped
with a Talent.


'Tis all for your good, therefore hold your Tongue.


Come this way, Labrax.


Well then.


Don't act underhand, I'll have none of your close Committees, and Whisperings.


Tell me, what did you give for Ampelisca, the other Girl?


Shall I make a good proposal t'ye?


With all my Heart.


I'll divide the Talent.


Very well.


One half shall go for her Ransom, and the other, he shall have, --


Best of all.


-- And I'll give him his Freedom for it, who was the cause of your finding your
Goods, and of my finding my Daughter.


Well decided, Sir; a thousand Thanks t'ye.


Well, and shall I have the Money?


The Matter's made up, Gripus: I have it.


Faith, I'd rather have it my self.


Troth, there's nothing for you, Gripus, therefore you must n't expect it. I'd
have ye discharge him from his Oath.


Zookers, I'm undone: I must go hang my self, or else I'm a dead Man. You shall
ne'er deceive me a second Tim^.


Labrax, you must sup with me to night.


I'll accept of your Kindness, Sir.


Come along both. -- Gallants, I would invite ye all, but I've nothing to
entertain ye with, nor any good thing to set before ye, and I presume you're
all engaged elsewhere. But, if you please to give us one good Applause, I invite
ye to a Collation on this Day sixteen Years. --


We will.


Kind Gentlemen, your Approbation.


THis Comedy is called Rudens, or the Cable, but with so little Reason, that
Madam Dacier changed the Name in her Version, and called it L'Heureux Naufrage,
the Happy Shipwreck, which indeed is the more proper Name of the two. The
Subject of this, as well as the last Play, is not so noble as that of
Amphitryon, it being chiefly the Discovery of Palestra, yet the variety of
Incidents affords more Diversion than Amphitryon, and the Decorations of the
Stage, is finer than either that or Epidicus; or indeed, than any of his, or
Terence's Plays. The Catastrophe ends more to the satisfaction of the
Spectators than Epidicus, for here is not only the Discovery, but the Marriage
of Palestra. The Poet's Management is the more remarkable in this Play, for
bringing to pass so many several Incidents in such a private, and almost
unfrequented Place, without offending the least against Probability.

THE Prologue is spoken by a God, because, only such a one can be supposed to
know all what is there related; and by Arcturus in particular, because he was
most generally believed to raise Storms and Tempests in the Sea, therefore the
more proper for this Narration. The Fore-part of this Prologue, exactly shows
the Opinions, Morality, and Doctrine of the Pagans in these Times.

Page. 152. l. 19. Diphilus calls this City, Cyrene.] This was Diphilus the
Greek Comedian, from whence Plautus borrowed the Subject of this and some other
of his Comedies.

Ibid. l. 20. Here dwells Demones, c.] This is the beginning of a Narration of
all what passed before the opening of the Stage, a thing very inartificial in a
Prologue, because it is spoken immediately and directly to the Audience. This
was Plautus's usual way in the rest of his Prologues, though not in so ill a
manner as in that of Amphitryon, where he foretells the Catastrophe, which of
all things ought to be concealed. The principal Fault of this, is the letting
the Spectators know that Palestra is Demones's Daughter, which takes away much
of the Pleasure of the Surprise; and seems but one Degree beneath that of the
Discovery of the Catastrophe.

Page. 153. l. penult. c. The Girl I told y' of, and another with her, in a
Fright, are leaped into the little Boat; and are now driven by the Tide, from
the Rock towards the Shore*] This is the latter end of the Shipwreck, and here
the Stage opens; and the Poet (as in the two foregoing Plays) has contrived it
as nigh to the Catastrophe as it is possible; but the several Incidents, he has
laid, and prepared before-hand, still put it off, and furnishes matter
sufficient for five Acts. This is one of the principal Secrets of a Dramatic
Poem.

Page. 155. l. 4. It can be no Wind, but some Conjurer raising the Devil.] Non
ventus fuit, verum Alcumena Euripidi. This is an Allusion to that Tragedy in
Euripides, called Alcumena, where a dreadful Storm was so lively represented,
that it became a Proverb at last for all Tempestuous Weather. This is lost
among us, therefore I have taken a little Liberty. Madam Dacier observes, that
it was not strange for a Slave of Cyrene to speak of this, because he was
supposed to have long served his Master in Athens, where he might have often
seen that Play acted.

Ibid. l. 6. The Windows shattered, so we shall keep open House now.]
Illustrioris fecit, fenestras indidit. It ought to be Illustriores, and refers
to Aedes, understood. It is taken in a comical Sense, not without something of
a Pun; therefore Open House, or, if you please, Splendid House, seems a true
Imitation of the Author's Design.

The three Gentlemen whom Pleusidippu^ brings along with him, are all Mu^es. If
any of our modern Poets had had the Management of 'em, they would undoubtedly
have made 'em speak several things, and perhaps with Reason, it being somewhat
improbable they sho^'d be silent all the Time they were there: But the
Ancicients, in this point, were extreme fearful of embarassing the Stage, and
often to a Fault, and too great a limitation to the variety of the Discourse.
They had commonly more Actors, and we have usually more Speakers.

Page. 156. l. 12, c. Father, well met. Them. Good morrow to ye, Sir. Sce. Are ye
Man or Woman, that you call him Father? Pleu. A Man, undoubtedly. Them. If so,
you must seek elsewhere. I had once a little Daughter, which I lost formerly,
but ne'er had a Son in my Life.] Demones's mentioning the loss of a Daughter,
was a very necessary Circumstance for the Audience to take notice of, and an
excellent Preparation for the main Incident: But for the manner of bringing of
it in, though there appears little design of instructing the Audience, and
consequently well in that respect, yet, methinks, it might have been better, or
at least more civil after this manner. Pleu. Father, well met. Them. Ah, Sir,
that word, Father, brings my poor Daughter to remembrance, that I lost
formerly.

Page. 157. l. 32. Hark ye, Sir, you that haunt the Temple for your Belly-sake.]
Heus tu! qui fana ventris caussa circumis. This was a very high Affront to a
Gentleman, in those days. But Pleusidippus takes no notice of it, either
because his Thoughts were otherwise employed, or rather (as Madam Dacier
observes) from the likeness of the word Ventris to Veneris, and, by means of
the pronunciation, he might mistake the sound. But this I could not preserve in
my Translation. It is observable besides, that the Scurtility, and the low
Jests of Sceparnio, which seem so very odd to us, do very well show the Nature
and Disposition of the poor Slaves of those Days.

Page. 158. l. 8, c. I fancy they're some damnable Camesters. Them. Why so? Sce.
Because they've lost all, their Ship and all.] Ut mea est opinio, propter viam
illi sunt vocati ad prandium. Dae^ Qui? S^ Quia post coenam, credo, laverunt
heri; confr^ navis in ma^i est illis. This is a very difficult Passage, and is
founded upon a Custom of those days, of sacrificing to Hercules before they
made a Voyage, and all what they could not eat, they burned, so that nothing
was left behind. From this Custom, Scep^rnio takes an occasion to s^y, that
those People on the Sea, propter viam illi sunt vocati ad prandium, that is,
they had sacrificed for a Voyage, because, says he, post coenam laverunt, that
is, had consumed all, for Lavo, here, and in several other Places of Plautus,
signifies to Lose, to Destroy, to get rid ^ff, and the like; and the word,
Coenam, signifies the Meal they made at that Office. This is undoubtedly the
true explanation of this Passage; but the Jest is lost in our Tongue, therefore
I have made something that has much of the same Force and Design.

Ibid. l. 22. Fare ye well.] Here Pleusidippus goes to the Assistance of the
Persons Ship-wrack'd, but finds 'em not, though he had seen 'em just before. This
may seem improbable for a Man of his amorous Temper to look so negligently; and
Madam Dacier reckons it a considerable Fault. But in answer to this, it may
easily be supposed, that the Rocks and Cliffs, and the distance of the Shore,
might make him miss of 'em, and come too late, for they were landed immediately
after his leaving the Stage. If it be asked, why did he not give this, or some
other Reason for it, when he came next on to the Stage? It may be replied, that
neither his Haste, Business, nor the Subject would admit of such a Narration at
that time. But if this be not allow'd as an Answer, and it still be counted a
Fault, yet thus far must be allow'd, that our Author has not such another in
all the three Plays.

Ibid. l. 27. I vom, two little Girls, all alone, in a small Boat, c.] In the
Original, nothing can be more natural and lively, than Sceparnio's Discourse
about the two Women in the Boat: And this is a sufficient Instance of Pla^us's
excellent Strokes upon an occasion.

Palestra was separated from her Companion, first by the greatness of her
Fright, which made her suppose her drowned; then by the different ways they
took through the Cliffs and Precipices; and this makes her appear alone upon
the Stage. What she says is very natural for one of her Circumstances, and
agreeable to the Doctrine and Religion of her time.

Page. 160. l. 26. I was born a Gentlewoman, it avails nothing; I'm more
miserable than if born a Slave.] These Words seem to have been spoken with no
other Design than to express Palestra's concern at this time, and they appear
only the natural effects of her Passion; but the Poet designed 'em a
Preparation towards the main Incident, her Discovery.

Page. 161. l. 27. Prithee, whereabouts are ye?] Ampelisc^ could not see her
Companion, because of the Cliffs between each other, at the further end of the
Stage; though at the same time, the Spectators might do both.

Page. 163. l. 10, 11. 'Tis a ^uge way from the Place we first set out at.] In
reality it was but a small distance from Cyrene, the Place where they put to
Sea at, but the Fright, and Ignorance of the Girls, made 'em think it a vast
way off.

Ibid. l. 12. You came in a Ship, by Sea then?] Nempe equo ligneo per vias
caeruleas estis vectae. This seems to have been taken from some Greek Tragedy,
it being so like their way of Expression, and particularly to that of Homer,
(...). But this Expression would by no means do in English Comedy.

THE First Interval is filled up, with the Priestesses care about Palestra and
Ampelisca, and with all what passed in the Temple.

This Scene of the Fishermen, and their Discourse, is a good Preparation for
the second Scene of the Fourth Act; and Plautus's lucky choice of a Place, to
bring 'em there with probability, is remarkable. The only Fault is, their
speaking a little too directly to the Audience, so mixing the Representation
with the Theatrical Action, but not in so open a manner as he does in some other
of his Plays.

Page. 164. l. 13. We make Incursions, every Day, from the Town to the Sea, for
Forage.] Ex urbe ad mare hu^ prodimus pabulatum. The word, Pabulatum, is a
proper military Term, signifying Forage, and here by a comical Metaphor
applied to Fishing; therefore the Translation, I believe, is just.

Ibid. l. 19. We slink home, well liquored with Salt-water.] Salsi la^tique pure
domum re^us clanculum. The Comicalness of this Passage cannot be well preserved
in our Language, consisting in the equivocal meaning of the Phrase; which, as
Madam Dacier observes, signifies either, A fine Treat of Salt Meats, or, A
washing, and cleansing with Salt Water, which was the truest sense in this
Place. The equivocal meaning of the Phrase, well liquored, seems to preserve a
little of the Design, though not much.

Page. 165. l. 12. Not drowned yet?] Ut peritis? This is instead of, Ut valetis,
which is, How do you? and that makes the thing so comical; it being a perfect
opposition of Terms which will not do in our Tongue: Therefore I thought the
best way to preserve it, would be to have a word proper to their Trade.

Page. 167. l. ult. c. Faith, 'twas an excellent Cast; 'thas quite gammon'd the
Rascal.] Profecto nimio lepide jecisti bolum: perjurum perdidisti. The Beauty
of this doth in a great measure consist in the double signification of the
Phrase, Iacere bolum, which is equally applied to casting of a Net, and to
casting of Dice, therefore it has the greater propriety in this Case; and
likewise to the different meanings of the word, Perdere, which signifies either
to Perish, and to Ruin, in a strict sense, else to Lose, or to Break in a
Gamester's sense. All these things I could not preserve in my Translation.

Page. 168. l. 5. Troth, I believe the Whore's-bud has drunk more than he could
bear.] Credo hercle (...) datum quod ^iberet. This is an Allusion to the Custom
in some of their great Feasts, of finishing all with a larger Cup than
ordinary, which every one was obliged to drink without losing a drop; and this
was called Anancaeum poculum, (...), a Cup of Necessity. So that in effect,
Ampelisca said, That Neptune had invited the Rogue to a Feast, and had killed
him with his Cup of Necessity. But this could not so well be taken notice of in
a Translation. Some think it alludes to that deadly Cup given to some sort of
Criminals; and others, to the Water of Lethe; but neither of these is very
probable.

Page. 168. l. 16. Just at Morning, we were thrown half dead ashore.] Here
Ampelisca finishes her Narration, which is very short and to the purpose. It is
very remarkable how handsomely and judiciously the Poet leaves out all that
latter part of the Ship-wrack, which the Audience were already informed of by
Sceparnio, in the fourth Scene of the first Act. This is a thing that ought
carefully to be observed by Dramatic Poets in all Narrations.

Ibid. l. 18. He's a plaguy hard Custom-master.] Eastidiosus Aedilis est. Part
of the Business of the Edil's was to inspect Merchants Goods, examine Weights
and Measures, and the like. Therefore Custom-master is the most proper for us,
to make it intelligible.

Ibid. l. 23. c. I think I had best send for Gown and Fur-Cap, and set up for a
Fortune teller.] Capillum promittam optumum'st, occipiamque ariolari. The Latin
signifies, I'll let my H^r grow, c. It was usual for their Fortune-tellers, and
such kind of People, to wear extreme long Hair; but that being a Custom not
known among us, I thought it not necessary to observe it in a Translation, the
force of it being preserved after a more intelligible manner.

Page. 169. l 8, c. She's mightily concerned for Labrax' s taking away a Casket
of hers; for there s^e had something to discover her Parents by.] It ought to
be observed that this, and six or seven lines further were designed by the Poet
to interest Trachalio more firmly in Palestra's concerns, and to give a fair
Pretext for demanding the Casket in the fourth Scene of the fourth Act, without
which the main discovery could never have been brought about. So it is an
excellent Preparation for that; but the Spectators could by no means foresee
it.

Page. 171. l. 3, 4. What a fine black Complexion* I meant, a lovely brown!]
Subvolturium! illud quidem, subaquilum volui dicere. The Word, Subaquilum,
signifies Brown, that is, Nigh the Colour of an Eagle: Now Sceparnio aiming at
that Word for Ampelisca's Skin, could only call to mind it was the colour of
some great ravinous Bird, therefore forges the Word Subvolturium* and therein
consists the comicalness of this Expression, which cannot easily be preserved
in our Tongue. Some think, that after Sceparnio had compared Ampelisca's Skin
to a Vulture, by reason of its brownness, he, recollecting himself, calls it,
Subaquilum, as being much of the same Colour, but the nobler Bird of the two.
This Explanation agrees best with my Translation, but is nothing so good as the
other.

Ibid. l. 6. I'm not for every one's turn.] Non ego sum pollucta pago. The
Word, Pollucta, is a Term borrowed from the Sacrifices, and is not to be
expressed in our Tongue. When they offered to Hercules, that little part of the
Beast which was burnt upon the Altar, was called Porrectum; and the rest, which
was exposed to the People's eating, was called Polluctum: So that the beauty of
the Word consists in the Allusion to that Custom, and the figurative sense,
which is lost to us. If I had done it, I'm no Pie for every one's cutting up,
it would have been somewhat nigher the Design, but not so modest.

Page. 172. l. 16. Without Flattery.] Praefis^ine. This Praefiscine, was always
used as a molifying word when one commended himself, and signifies properly,
without Envy. The Pleasantry of this place, consists in Sceparnio's applying it
to a quite contrary thing, namely, to his calling himself Great Owl,
immediately after.

Ibid. l. 17. I was a great Owl for not falling in Love before now.] Not so
much for the Pleasure of the Amour, as the ease of drawing of Water with half
the Pains; a Fancy natural and comical enough, when rightly apprehended.

Labrax and Charmides were both cast away at the same Time with Palestra and
Ampelisca, but yet 'tis a considerable while after, that they appear upon the
Stage, because they were thrown ashore on a distant Place from them, sometime
after too, and the mean time were searching for what they had lost,

Pa. 173. l. 22. Oh, Liberty, you're a rare Goddess too, thou ne'er go to
Sea with a Hero.] Edipol, Libertas, lepida es, quae nunquam pedem vol^isti in
navem cum Hercule una imponere. This Passage is founded upon the Story of
Hercules's Voyages, which were undertaken against his will; from whence, the
People afterwards took an occasion to say, Liberty never much cared for an
Hero's Company at Sea.

Page. 174. l. 16, 17. 'Twas a more fatal Supper to me than ever Thyestes' s, and
Ter^us' s was to them.] Thyestes, and Tereus, had their Children served up to
'em at Supper. This Story is not so well known among us, but for want of a
parallel one in our Ages, to preserve the Force of this Passage, I was forced
to take it as it is.

Ibid. l. 27, c. You were a fresh raw Fellow, n^w I've seasoned your
Understa^g.] Te ex (...) salsum f^ci opera mea. The Jest of this consists in
the equivocal meaning of the Word Salsus, which signifies either, Sa^ed, or
else, Cunning, Subtle, and the like; but the equivocal Words, Fresh, R^w, and
Seasoned, have done even as we^ in our Tongue.

Ibid. l. 30, c. Would the Devil had ye for a Rogue, Char. And you too: I'm
sure I made broad signs to have him come for ye.] Quin tu hinc is a me in
maximam malam crucem. Ch. Eas: easque res agebam commodum. I will not
positively affirm that I have hit of the true Sense of this Passage; but
however the beauty of Charmides's answer consists in the playing upon the word,
Eas, which is either a Verb or a Noun, and that makes such a double meaning, as
I do not find our English Tongue is capable of expressing.

Page. 175. l. 4, c. Faith, I tremble like one ready to engage the Enemy; and my
Jaws do so quake, that my Words break out like Flashes of Lightning.] Equidem
me ad velitationem exerceo: nam omnia corusca prae tremore fabulor. This is a
very difficult Passage to understand, and more to translate, by reason of the
harshness of the Simile in our Tongue. V^litatio, signifies a Skirmish, which
was usually made by the Velites, that is, the Light-harness'd Soldiers; and
these Men always made ^se of Darts, whose Points would glitter at a distance,
sometimes one way, and sometimes another. Now Charmides, trembling with Cold,
compares himself to these Velites, or Skirmishers, who never keep their Place;
and his Words, which came out broken and by piece-meal, to the unequal
Glitterings or Flashes of their Darts. This is the best Interpretation I can
find of this Place, and the little Liberty I have taken, could not be avoided.

Ibid. l. 9. This God can't afford one Brandy-shop in all his Dominions.] No
thermopolium quidem ullum instruit. There Thermopoli^, were certain Public
Places, common in Greece and Italy, where they drank hot Waters, sometimes
mingled with Wine and Honey; but this could not be taken notice on in a
Translation.

Ibid. l. 15. I fancy, I should make an excellent Snap-Dragon.] Quid, si aliquo
ad ludos me pro ma^duco locem? The Ancients had their Mand^ci, and their
C^riae, to march before their great Sights and Triumphs; the first were certain
Antic Figures with wide Mouths, like our Snap-dragons for Mayor's Shows, and
the second were somewhat like our Merry Andrews.

Page. 176. l. 10, c. The poor Creatures are mightily afraid of some Body, and
talk of being tossed all Night long, and thrown ashore this Morning.] By these
Words of Scepernio's, Labrax finds out his Girls, whom he supposed to have been
drowned, which most naturally clears the Stage and finishes the Act. The Poet's
Conduct in bringing about this material Discovery, is excellent: Ampelisca is
sent out in the fourth Scene for Water to Demones's House, and upon that
depends the greatest part of the Act. The Time Sceparnio is gone in to draw
Water, she is frighted off the Stage, which occasions him to follow her to the
Temple; and in his Return, he drops these Words accidentally, so that nothing
could have been brought about more naturally.

Page. 177. l. 13, c. For shame! Arn't ye content to have the Sea wash all away,
but you must be for the same Sport at Land too? Sce. Be washed, and powdered
too, I care n't a Straw.] Eho! an te poenitet in mari quod elavi, in hic in
terra iterum eluam? Sc. Eluas tu an ex^ngare, ciccum non interduim. The Word,
Eluo, is equivocal, signifying either, Washing, or Ruining; upon which depends
Sceparnio's answer, El^as tu an exungare, where I rendered Exungare, Powdered,
because Anointing is not known among us. The Word, Ciccum, signifies that Skin
or Membrane which parts the little Cells or Holes of a Pomegranate, and contains
the Kernels; and is here mentioned as a thing of the smallest value in the
World.

Ibid. l. ult. Old Neptune put upon us with his Water, as though it had been Wine
of the best.] Quasi vinis Graecis Neptunus nobis suffudit mare. In those times,
they always mingled Sea-Water with all Greek Wines when they transported 'em,
except that of Chio, which makes Horace call it, Chium maris expers. The
natural Sense of this Passage, is, Neptune has mixed us with Sea-water as though
we had been Greek Wine; but the Wit of it is in a great measure lost to us.

THE second Interval is filled up with what passed in the Temple between
Labrax, Palestra, and Ampelisca: And here Plautus's Judgment is very remarkable
in concealing Labrax's Sacrilege from the Spectators Eyes, who, in those Days
would have been much disgusted at the Sight.

This Scene begins exactly like the first Scene of the second Act of Plautus's
Mercator; and this Dream is an ingenious Preparative for some things that
follow, but more especially designed for a Pretext to bring Demones from all
Company, and to consult by himself upon the Stage.

Page. 179. l. 23, 24. As ye hope for a good Crop of Herbs, and a plentiful
Harvest of Plants.] Si spe^ tibi anno multum futuro Sirpe Laserpitium. This
Sirpe, is a Species of Benjamin, from whence sprung an odoriferous Liquor,
called Laserpitium, quasi, Lac Serpitium, which was so common in Cyrene, that
it was called Laserpicificerae Cyrenae. These Names, being unknown to us, and
making but an indifferent Sound, were not so necessary to be taken notice of in
a Translation.

Page. 181. l. 4. Pluck out his Eyes, and make Cats Meat of 'em.] Iube oculos
elidere, itidem ut sep^s faciant coqui. That is, Pluck out his Eyes, as Cooks
do those of Cuttle-Fishes. This relates to a Custom of those Times which,
perhaps we know nothing of; and consequently unfit for a close Translation.

Page. 183. l. 15, c. They know that you were born out of a Lobster, and
therefore can be no Enemy to Cherry-Cheeks.] Te ex concha natam esse autumant:
Cave t^arum conchas spernas. More closely thus; They are sensible you were born
of a Shell-Fish, therefore despise not their Shell-Offerings; for since they
had lost all, they had no other Offerings but Shells, things usually
consecrated to Temples nigh the Sea, which were much garnished by them. But
still the principal Joke lies in his metaphorically calling these Girls (...),
because they were empty; and that made me translate it as I did.

Page. 184. l. 23. I'll straight away with 'em both.] Equidem istas jam ambas
educam for as. The word, for as, is spoken here only with respect to the Entrance
into the Temple-Court, in which almost all this Scene passed.

Ibid. l. ante-penul. I'll lash ye, till your Backs be as full of Furrows as
the Sea with Waves.] Quasi myrteta juncis, item ego vos virgis circumvinciam. In
the Temples of Venus were several Bundles of Myrtle hung up, and consecrated to
her, and these were bound up with Rushes: From these, Demones takes an occasion
to threaten his Men, to bind 'em (or rather to line 'em) like these Bundles of
Myrtle. But the Beauty of it is lost in our Tongue, which made me take this
Liberty in my Translation, though perhaps not with equal success with some other
Passages where I was forced to take the like Liberty.

Page. 185. l. 10. One of 'em is an Athenian, of a very good Family.] This
Passage does not only help to interest Demones in the Girls Affairs, but is
also a further Preparation for the main Discovery in the fourth Act, though this
does not appear so to the Audience, the concealment of which, makes the great
Cunning of the Poet.

Ibid. l. ante-penul. If you havn't more Remembrances on yours.] Ni
offeramentas habebis plures in tergo tuo. That is to say, Lashes, or Streaks of
a Whip. The word, Offeramenta, is a Religious Term, signifying Off'rings or
Presents, and is very comically applied in this place; but the beauty of it is
lost in our Tongue. I could not think of a better word to answer it than
Remembrance, which well enough bears a double meaning.

Page. 186. l. 16, 17. Faith, I'll make ye glad to glean up your scattered
Teeth.] Jam hercle tibi ^ssis in ore fiet mergis pugneis. The word, Merga,
signifies a Pitchfork, and the true meaning of this Passage is paraphrastically
thus; As they lift up their Pitchforks to heap Corn, so will I lift up my
Fists, and heap a whole Harvest of Cuffs on your Face. But this Simile will not
do in our Tongue, therefore I have altered it, still preserving as much of the
Allusion as I could.

Page. 188. l. penul. Give him his Load.] Ni istunc istis invitassitis. The
word, Invito, is a Term borrowed from Feasts and Treats where there is hard
Drinking. This Metaphor is comically applied to Blows, and happily enough,
since they have often the same stupefying effects with Drink. The Translation
seems as lucky as the Original, though its Design is not so well perceived at the
first sight.

Page. 189. l. 9. By the old Man's erecting his two Monuments.] Ita duo
destituit signa. The word, Dest^to, is a term of Husbandry, and signifies to
Set, Plant, or the like. The word, Plant, might have done well enough here, but
only Erect, joined to Monument, makes the truer Propriety of Terms.

Ibid. l. 14, 15. Marry, the Palestra that answers, is none (...)' mine.] Haec
equident Palaestra, qua respondit, non mea est. This Palaestra, was a Place of
public Exercising, over the Gate of which was a Statue of Heroules, with an
Inscription, PALAESTRA; now Labrax finding this stout Fellow with his Club,
whom before he had compared to Hercules, answering instead of Palestra, he
wittily alludes to that Statue, and says, that Palestra was none of his. So
that the Beauty of this Passage can never be preserved in our Tongue.

Page 190. l. 13, 14. What, stone a Man like a Dog? Pleu. Yes, such a Rascal as
he.] Quid ego, quasi canem, hominem insectarer lapidibus nequissimum? This
Passage is wrong in all the common Editions; it ought to be spoken by two
Persons, not one, and must be read thus. Quid ego, quasi canem, hominem
insectarer lapidibus? Pl. Nequissimum?

Ibid. l. 16. He'll have a confounded brush at my Coat.] Converret jam hic me
totum cum pulvisculo. That is, He'll not leave a bit of Dust on me, or, He'll
make nothing but Dust of me. My Translation will answer either way, and would
be as comical, were it less common.

Ibid. l. penul. Whether you'll go to Iail the usual way, or be dragged by the
Heels.] Rapi te obtorto collo mavis, an trahi? When any Person was brought
before the Praetor, they always threw his Gown or Cloak about his Neck, and led
him that way; and this was called, Rapi obtorto collo. But this could not be
well taken notice of in a Translation.

Page. 191. l. 3. Meet me at the Town-Gate.] In urbem ire obviam ad portum mihi.
It ought to be read, Portam, and in this the common Editions are all false.

Ibid. l. 11, c. I didn't carry her away. Pleu. Will you Lie, Sirrah? Lab.
Truly, I only embarked her.] Non avexi. Pl. Cur negas? Lab. Quia pol provexi.
This same playing upon the Words, Avexi and Provexi, is not easily preserved in
our Tongue.

Page. 193. l. 5, 6. I believe this Merchant's changed to a Stock-Dove, for by
and by, he'll be stocked into the Pigeon-Holes.] Illic in columbum, credo, leno
vortitur: nam in colambari collum haud multo post erit. The word, Columbar,
signifies either a Dove-house, or a certain Iron Collar used for the Necks of
Prisoners, something of the nature of our Stocks, and this word occasioned this
Pleasantry. Our Stocks being often called Pigeon-Holes, in merriment, has made
the Translation every way up to the Original, in that respect.

THE third Interval is filled up with Pleusidippus's carrying Labrax before the
Praetor, and his Trial, and likewise with what passed in Demones's House.

Page. 193. l. 13, 14. But my jealous prying Wife watches me on all sides, for
fear I should be too sweet upon 'em.] This seems to have been spoken with no
other design than Demones's complaining of his Wife; but in reality, it is an
Ingenious Preparation of the Poet's, for Demones to have a good Pretext for
bringing out the two young Women in the fourth Scene of the Act, when there was
a necessity for their coming upon the Stage. This is a neat cast of our Poet's
Skill.

Ibid. l. 15. What's become of our Man Gripus, who went out a Fishing last
Night.] This is a Preparation for Gripus's appearing in the next Scene.
Methinks his coming might have looked somewhat more natural if Demones had
dropped these Words somewhere in the last Act, perhaps in the finishing of the
Ninth Scene when he left the Stage, and not so immediately before his
Appearance; but then there would not have been such a plain Pretext for
Demones's appearing this Time, for the looking for Gripus, may be supposed to
be one Reason of his coming on the Stage.

Pa. 194. l. 15, c. Now I, who am careful, have happened of that, which, if I
please, will keep me from all Care.] Nam ego nunc mihi, qui impiger fui,
repperi, ut piger, si velim, siem. There seems a peculiar happiness in the
Latin Tongue for these sort of Turns, of which both Plautus and Terence have
many elegant ones. If my Translations in these Places, will teach the Air of
the Original but in a tolerable degree, it is as much as I can hope for.

Ibid. l. 27, 28. I'll have a Royal Sun for Pleasure, like the K -- of F -- ]
Post animi causa mihi navem faciam, atque imitabor Stratonicum. This
Stratonicus was Treasurer to Philip of Macedon, so rich as he became a Proverb
among the Grecians, as Crassus among the Romans. If any one blame me for taking
too much liberty; after owning it is the most I have taken throughout my
Translation, I must say, I could not make it so intelligible to an English
Reader without this, or something like it.

Page. 195. l. 6. 7. After all, this Monarch here, must dine to Day with a Brown
George, and only Salt and Vineager-Sawce.] This was the most ordinary Diet of
the Slaves in those Days, therefore wittily enough remarked by Gripus.

Ibid. l. 10. Only to unshackle your Rope, that hangs at your Heels.] Dum hanc
tibi, quam trahis, rudentem complico. This Cable gives Name to the whole Play,
because upon this, depends the discovery of Palestra; but by the same Reason
the Poet might as well have called the Play's Name, Portmantle, Casket, c.

Page. 197. l. 3. No Man pretending to take 'em away.] Nec Manu asseruntur. The
Phrase, Asserere manu, properly signifies giving Freedom to a Slave, which
thing Gripus comically applies to Fishes, and immediately after, says, Vendo
pro meis venalibus; for Slaves were called Venales. These are not easily
preserved in our Tongue.

Page. 199. l. ult. Will ye put the Business to the Man of this House?]
Trachalio had all the reason that could be, to get the business referred to
Demones, he being the only Man he knew thereabouts; and Gripus had as much
reason to allow of that Person, since he was forced to admit of a Reference,
because he was his own Master: These two things ought to be observed. Now
Trachalio's Design was only to assist the poor Girl, whose Interests he had
most justly espoused; but the Poet's Design was greater, to wit, Palestra's
discovery, which could not so easily be foreseen by the Spectators. This is one
great piece of Art in Dramatic Poetry.

Perhaps some may think that there is too much Trifling in this Scene, and that
Gripus makes too many Delays; but this is so far from being faulty, that it is
an extraordinary piece of Art, which covers, and conceals the Poet's Designs,
and makes the Discovery seem still more unaffected and accidental; and nothing
can be more probable than Gripus's unwillingness of parting with so rich a
Prize.

Page. 205. l. 22. So; -- There then; -- now 'tis open.] Been: Hoc habet: soluta
'st. Gripus, taking much Pains, opens the Portmantle, then cries, Hoc habet,
the grace of which consists in its being the Gladiator's Phrase, and therefore
is not to be preserved in our Tongue.

Page. 206. l. 16. First, tell me your Father's Name] Here comes the main
Discovery; and this, as well as that in Epidicus, is attended with both the
Admirable, and Probable; the Amirable, in the great Surprise on all sides, in
finding a Daughter, after so many Years missing of her; and the Probable, in
adjusting of all Circumstances so as to fall out necessarily. The Probability
appears more clearly by the Audiences knowing that Demones had lost a Daughter,
and that Palestra wanted Parents.

Ibid. l. antepenult. And a little Sow.] Et sucula. The Word, Sucula, signifies
both a Sow, and the Barrel of any Engine to draw up great Weights; and by
reason of this double signification, Gripus makes answer, Quin tu i dierecta,
cum sucula, cum porculis, that is, Go and be hanged, with your Sow and Pigs
together. I could not preserve this, without I had called it a Ram, which
signifies an Engine as well as a Beast, but then I must have wanted a fit Word
for Porculis.

Page. 210. l. 1. A duce on him, for his Wells and Waters.] Hercules istum
infeliciter cum sua licentia. Demones, says this, because of the Word Licet,
Trachalio had so often repeated just before, of which, Well, was a true
Translation; upon which account, I was forced to translate Licentia, Wells and
Waters, rather as an imitation of what Plautus would have said in this Case,
supposing him an Englishman, than what he really did as he was a Roman.

Page. 211. l. ult. But I'll in to the Sacrifice, and there give order for the
Supper.] Here ends the fourth Act, which is contrary to all the common Books,
who make it end a Scene after; a thing very usual in most of our Author's
Plays.

THE fourth Interval is filled up with Trachalio's going to find out his
Master, and Demones's Sacrifice within Doors, as likewise Labrax's Trial.

In this Scene our Poet has drawn Pleusidippus both amorous and foolish, and
all Trachalio's Trifling is chiefly to laugh at him.

Page. 212. l. 21. Leave adviseing, and don't be always a Counsell^r.] At sum
quidem, no censionem semper facias. Here Pleusidippus plays upon the equivocal
meaning of the Word, Censeo, so often used by Trachalio, which is either to
Pass Judgment upon a thing, (...) a t^rm of Sale which signifies to Prize a
thing, s like. The little Liberty I have taken does in some measure answer the
Design.

Page. 213. l. 16, 17. 'S Death, the Fellow has changed his N^te, and has
advised me to a fine purpose.] Per^ delectum dimisit, nunc non censet cum volo.
Now Pleusidippus runs upon another Meaning of the Word, Censeo, which is
likewise a proper Term of the Censors, signifying to List or Muster Soldiers
When Trachalio had changed his Note and came to his Non censeos, Pleusidippus,
taking it in his own Sense, did in effect say, Alas, I'm come too late, he'll
receive no more Soldiers. I could not preserve this in my Translation.

Ibid. l. 22, c. I'm persuaded that all Merchants of my Faculty were born to
make the World Sport.] Nam lenones ex gaudio credo esse procreatos. More
closely thus, I believe that all Slave-Merchants were born (or produced) out of
Joy. But this would not do in our Language.

Page. 214. l. 21, 22. I think 'thas got a Consumption, it falls away so
wretchedly.] Namque quidem hoc Vere natum est veru, ita in m^nibus consen^scit.
More closely thus, I think 'tis like the Spring-Flowers, that wither as a Man
touches 'em. I altered it because the Simile will scarce do in our Language,
and I suppose it was made upon the account of the likeness of the Words, Ver
and Veru.

Ibid. l. 28, c. Are ye a Mountibank? Lab. No, Faith, I'm another sort of Bank.
Gri. What then, a Bankrupt?] Number medicus quaeso es? La. Immo edepol una littera
plus sum, quam medicus. Gr. Tum tu mendicus es? By the help of a little
Liberty, the Humour of this Passage is preserved, but that is more owing to the
Language than the Translator.

Page. 215. l. penult. Have ye swallowed a Fire-Coal, that you cannot open your
Mouth?] That is, for fear the Wind should get in, and blow it up afresh.

This Scene finishes the Play, and it is very remarkable, that the Ancients
often ended their Plays with few Actors, and with a small Appearance upon the
Stage; and they scarce ever used an Actor but with an absolute necessity of
carrying on, or unravelling the Plot. Our modern Comedies generally end with a
multitude of Actors; now if this be done with Probability, and Necessary
Pretexts of Business, and likewise without embarrasing the Stage, or
confounding the Audience, it is undoubtedly a Perfection that the Ancients
seldom or never aimed at.

Page. 221. l. 1. Gallants, I would invite ye all, c] Here Demon^s speaks
directly to the Spectators, but since it is upon the finishing the Play, it has
few or none of those Ill Consequence^ it would have had in another place.


