AMPHITRYON.

SCENE, Thebes, and the Street before Amphitryon' s Door.

TIME, about Nine Hours, beginning at Two or Three of Clock in the Morning.

GALLANTS, AS y' ever hope for my Godships Assistance in your Merchandise,
Buyings, Sellings, and all other Things; that I make your Business and Accounts
thrive abroad and at home, and well and largely augment your daily Profits for
the present and future; that I ever bring ye good News for you and your
Families, and be the Messenger of nothing but the extraordinary Advantage of
the Public, (for y' all know how the other Gods have given and granted me the
Preference as to News and Gain;) and lastly, that I confirm all with a
perpetual Supply of Riches; I require of ye a favourable Attention, and a just
and impartial Censure (...) our Play.

Now, Gentlemen, I shall let ye know whose Orders, and what Business brought my
Worship hither, as also the Title I bear. By Jove' s Orders I came, Mercury' s
my Title, sent hither by my Father to beg your Attention: Though he knows he
might use his absolute Power, and is sensible of the due Fear and Reverence y'
have for him; yet still he commands me t'use nothing but gentle Expressions, and
obliging Entreaties. For, the truth o^'t is, this Jove, whose Messenger I am,
is as fearful a Fellow as some o'you; and no wonder if he be so, since his
Father and Mother were both Mortals. Now I, his own Son, am a little infected
with my Fathers Cowardice; therefore I'm come in a very civil way to offer ye
Peace. I desire nothing but what's reasonable and feasible, for 'tis a
reasonable God requires Reason from a reasonable People; but to require Roguery
from reasonable People, is base; and to expect Reason from Rascals, is
Nonsense; since such People neither know Reason, nor observe it. -- Pray,
Gentlemen, listen to what Im to tell ye. Your Wishes certainly ought to go
along with ours; for, my Father and I were always Favourers of you, and your
Republic. How often, in other Tragedies, have I seen the Gods, Neptune,
Virtue, Victory, Mars, and Bellona, bragging of those Favours to ye, which my
Father, the King of Heaven, has been the prime Founder of? But 'tisn't my
Fathers way, to hit grateful People in the Teeth with old Kindnesses, but
thinks all his Favours deservedly bestowed.

Now, Gallants, I shall first propose my Demands, then tell ye the Argument of
this Tragedy. -- *[He looks steadily on the Spectators] Why that Frown now? --
Is't because I call it a Tragedy? Why I'm a God; I'll transform it, if ye
please, out of Tragedy into Comedy, and never alter a Verse. Are ye willing or
not? But what a blockheadly Question was that for a Deity to ask, as though he
could be ignorant of your Pleasures? I know your Minds to a Tittle; and I'll
make it a Hodge podge, a Tragi-Comedy; for there's no Reason t'ha't all Comedy,
when Kings and Gods are Actors in it. But how shall we do, now a Slave has the
principal Part? Why, as I told ye before, 't shall be a Tragi-Comedy. Now,
Gentlemen, Jupiter entreats ye by me, to order the Guards to inspect Pit, Box,
and Gallery, and if they find any suborned to clap an Actor, to take his Cloak
for a Pawn. But to those Actors, who shall make Parties to gain the Prize,
either by Cunning, Letters, Messengers, or Themselves, or corrupt the Edils to
break their Oaths; Jove orders a Punishment equal to ones buying of Votes in
the Government for himself or others. He says, 'tis Merits make Conquerors, not
Ambition and Treachery; and why shou'dn't the Players Laws be as strict as the
Magistrates? Merit's the best Mark for Ambition, not Favours; but he who does
well, can want none, while he meets with impartial Judges. My Father likewise
commands me to have Inspectors over the Actors, that if any one has his
Emissaries to Clap, or by his malicious Bungling hinders another Applause, he
shall have his fine Cloths stripped over his Ears, and soundly lashed, I
would not have ye wonder now at Jove' s troubling his Head about the Players; nay
don't, good now! for he is to make one himself in this Comedy. -- [He pauses.]
Why make ye such a Wonderment? As though ye never heard of Jove' s turning
Player? A Year ago, when the Players invoked him in a pitiful Farce, he came to
their Assistance; and certainly he will in a Tragedy. I tell y' again, that
Jupiter himself is to play his Part, and my Godship with him: Therefore, pray
listen well to the Argument of this Comedy.

First, This City here is called Thebes; that House [Pointing to Amphitryon's
House] is Amphitryon' s, an Argive by Parents and Country, and married to
Alcmena, Electryon' s Daughter. He's now General of the Theban Army against the
Teleboans; but before he went to the Campaign, he got his Wife with Child. (I'm
sure y'all know my Fathers Good Nature, his large Allowance upon these
Occasions, and how much he makes of a Sweet Bit.) It seems, his Mouth watering
at Alcmena, unknown to her Husband, he borrows her upon Interest, fairly enjoys
her, and gets her with Child too. Now, that ye may well understand the Mystery,
she's now with Child by my Father and her Husband too. Jupiter' s this moment at
Bed with her, and for that Reason, this Night's made longer than ordinary, that
he mightn't be stinted of his Pleasure; and he has cast about so as to pass for
Amphitryon. But, Gentlemen, ye needn't be surprised at the sight of my fine
Garb here, and my appearing under the Form of a Slave; for though I bring y' an
old Story, the Dress is new, and so shall my Dress be new too. For, as I said
before, my Father's now within Doors; there behold Jupiter fairly turned into
Amphitryon! All the S^rvants would swear 'tis their Master, he has got such an
excellent Knack at transforming himself. For my part, I have got my self the
plain Shape of Socia, one of Amphitryon' s Attendants at the Camp, the better
to carry on my Fathers Intrigue, and prevent Servants Enquiries after my
Person, when they see me so frequently up and down the House: But now they take
me a Fellow-Servant and Comrade of theirs, not a Soul asks me who I am, or from
whence I came. My Father, this minute, lies melting in Joys, embracing his
lovely Object, telling her pretty Stories of what passed in the Camp, how
bravely he put the Enemy to the Rout, and what large Presents were made him;
she, poor Lady, all the while taking the Gallant for the Husband. The Presents
to Amphitryon we stole; and, ye know, nothing lies out of my Fathers Reach.
This Day Amphitryon comes home from his Army; and with him, his Servant Socia,
whose Shape I wear. Now, to distinguish us easily, I have little Wings upon my
Hat, and my Father a Golden Tuft upon his, which Amphitryon knows nothing of.
You know these Marks, but not one of the Family does. -- [Discovering Socia at
a great Distance.] Ha, Ha, yonder comes Amphitryon' s Man Socia from the Port
with his Candle and Lanthorn. I shall soon send his Worship packing from these
Quarters. He's a coming; I hear him. -- You'll have rare Sport, Gentlemen, to
see Jove and Mercury play their Parts.

WAS there ever a Bolder, or Braver Hero than I? One that so well knows our
Night-walkers Mettle, as to trust his Person without a Convoy at this time of
Night? -- But in what a fine Pickle should I be, if Mr. Constable and his Watch
should pick m'up and in with me to Lobs-Pound? Out of which damned Kitchen, to
morrow must I be dished up for the Whipping Post; and not have the Benefit of
the Layety to plead in my own Defence. My Lord himself could not save me, nor
should I persuade one honest Fellow to believe me innocent. Thus should I have
eight strongdock'd Rogues belabouring of my poor Corps like so many Smiths upon
an Anvil; and this the public Reception from the Magistrates at my first
Entry. A pox of our Generals Politics, to disturb a Man's Natural Rest, and
force him from the Port at this fine Seal. Could not To-morrow as well served
his Turn? -- Well! 'tis a cursed Plague to serve one of these Lords; especially
when he hurries a body Night and Day to no purpose, and not allow him a bit of
Time to sleep in. These great Folks lye always Lolling and Dozing themselves,
and think they've got a License to do what they please. They reckon Poor-mens
Grease at Three Ha'pence a pound, and caren't a Fart whether their Commands be
reasonable or no. So this same Slavery's a damned thing; but I must be their
Ass, to receive and bear all with Patience.


Troth I've most reason to complain for this Days Slavery: Free by Birth, yet
degraded by my Father to this Employment. This Scoundrel, a Slave by Nature,
have the Impudence to complain, when I, a Slave but in Name, must bear as much.


Stay, 'tis just come into my Head to thank the Gods for my safe Arrival, and
the Rewards they've bestowed of me. But, in faith, if they ga' me my due
Rewards, they'd set some sturdy Whores-bird to meet me and beat out ha'f a
dozen of my Teeth: For, to say the Truth, I have been a kind of an ungracious
Fellow to 'em.


This Fellow's a little singular; he fairly owns himself a Rogue however.


Well, I see things fall out otherwise than either I, or any other Citizen
hoped for; that is, to have us come home alive again, and Conquerors. Our Army's
upon the March homewards, the bloody Campaign over, and the Enemy routed and
dispersed, who before had made so many wet Handkerchiefs in Thebes. We've
stormed their Town too by the Valour of our brave Boys, especially by the
Authority and Conduct of my Lord Amphitryon, who divided the Booty, Lands, and
Corn, among the Soldiers, and firmly settled our Sovereign Creon in his Theban
Kingdom. My Honour's sent Express from the Port, to tell his Lady how bravely
he has acquitted his Charge, and the Success of these noble Qualities. -- I'm
studying what to say when I come in her Ladyships Presence. -- Suppose I tell
her some damned Wisker; why that's but m'old Dog-trick; for I'm sure, when they
were hottest in Fight, I was hottest in Flight: However, I'll brag as though I
had been in the midst of 'em, and tell her all what I heard from other People.
But first, I must consider with my self what graceful Postures, and what
Rhetoric to accost her Ladyship with. -- Thus then I begin. At our first happy
Arrival at the Enemies Country, and the Disembarkment of our Troops, my Noble
Lord Amphitryon immediately chose out the Flower of all the Nobility, as Envoys
to the Teleboans, to declare his Pretensions: That if they'd freely, without
any Constraint, deliver up their unjust Spoils, with the Authors of such
outrageous Actions, and make Reparation for what they had disposed of; he'd
immediately retire home with all his Troops, send the Argives to their own
Country, and leave all things in a peaceable and quiet Posture: But if they
were so obstinate as to refuse these gracious Proposals, their Town must expect
the utmost Severities of Fire and Sword. At the Delivery of this Message,
according to my Lord's Orders, these haughty Men, proud o'their own Strength
and Courage, very roughly treated our Envoys, telling 'em, They knew how to
defend what they had got, by their drawn Swords; and therefore we had best
speedily draw off our Troops from their Dominions. Upon the Receipt of this
rude Answer, Madam, my Lord advanced towards 'em with his whole Army. The
Teleboans did the like with their Troops from the Town, accoutred with the
finest Equipage in the World. After the Approaches of these two numerous
Armies, each Man and Officer in his proper Post, they drew up their Troops in
Battalia, we after our own Way, and the Enemy after theirs. Next, Madam, the
two Generals advanced to the Fronts of each Army, and there parleyed; agreeing
to this Article, That the Vanquished should deliver up their Cities, Lands,
Gods, and Selves, to the Mercy of the Conquerors. Upon this, Madam, the shrill
Trumpets sound, the spacious Valleys echo, the Soldiers shout on all sides,
the Generals send their Prayers to Jove, and every where encourage their Men;
each single Man lays lustily about him, bright Weapons clash, great Lances
shiver, Heavens high Arch bellows with the Soldiers Clamours, a Cloud arises from
the gloomy Breath of the Combatants, and wounded Wretches sink beneath the
bloody Swords. -- At last, Madam, Fortune was so favourable to our Wishes, as
to make us Conquerors; the Enemy dropping on all sides, we broke in, and fell
upon 'em with dreadful Fury. Still not a Man turned his Back, or stirred a foot
out of the Place he fought in; they choosing Death sooner than quitting their
Posts, and fell where they stood, keeping their Ranks after Death. My Lord
finding such Obstinacy, ordered the Cavalry of the Right Wing to Wheel about
and Charge; these he poured in upon 'em with horrible Outcries, mangling and
treading under foot these Impious Men, with prodigious Slaughter. --


Thus far the Rogue's in the right; for my Father and I were both present at
the Action.


-- In short, Madam, these resolute People fled for it; We took fresh Courage,
pursued, and cut 'em all in pieces. My Lord Amphitryon fell upon Pterelas their
King, and cut off his Head with his own Hands. This Engagement lasted from
Morning till Evening, (I have the more reason to remember't, for the De'el a bit
of Dinner got I that Day,) but the Night put an End to this bloody Contest.
Next day came the Magistrates from the Town, all in Tears, submissively
acknowledging their Misdemeanours, promising, To deliver up all Things, Sacred
and Profane, their City, Wives, and Children, all at Discretion. Last of all,
Madam, my Noble Lord Amphitryon, as the prize of his undoubted Valour, was
presented with the great Golden Cup that Pterelas used to drink in. -- All this
will I tell my Lady. --


Ha, Ha! he's making his Approaches; but I'll confront him. I mustn't suffer
the Fellow to lodge within these Quarters to Night. Since I've taken upon me
his Shape, I shall play fast and loose with him; and as long as I do resemble
him in Body, troth, 'tis but decent I should in Actions and Manners: Therefore
must I turn a damnable subtle, sly Varlet, to cut him down at his own Play of
Roguery, and send him packing. -- Hey-day! what now? -- He's a Star-gazing, but
I'll watch his Waters for him.


Faith and Troth, if a Body may believe or know any thing, I think Aurora went
tipsy to Bed last Night, and is now in a dead Sleep. Why yonder's Charles-Wain
in the same Place still; the Moon hasn't stirred step since she Rise; the Rock
and Spindle, the Evening and Seven-Stars can't get down for their Lives; the
Signs all obstinately keep their Posts; and the Night won't budge a bit for the
Day.


Hold to it, Goddess Night, to obey my Fathers Commission as you've begun. You
do a great God a great Service, and he'll greatly gratify ye for it.


I think there never was such a long Night since the Beginning of the World,
except that Night I had the Strapado, and rid the Woodden-Horse till Morning;
and of my Conscience that was twice as long. By the Mackins, I believe Phebus
has been playing the Good-Fellow, and's asleep too. I'll be hanged if he be not
in for it, and has took a little too much of the Creature.


Say ye so, Slave? What, treat Gods like your Selves? By Jove, have at your
Doublet, Rogue, for Scandalum Magnatum. Approach then; you'll have but small Joy
here.


Where are your true Fornicators now, that can't sleep without a Wench? Here's
a Night for 'em then; now they may take their full Swing of Whoring.


The Rogue has hit my Father to an Ace; for he has resolved to have his full
Swing of his dear Alcmena to Night.


Well, now for my Lord's Message to my Lady. --


This is the most cowardly Milksop.


Now I think better on it, this may be some Rogue to steal my Cloak off my Back.



The poor Dog quakes; I'll have a little Sport with him.


Good lack! how my Teeth chatter in my Head? The Man infallibly stands here to
give me a sound Welcome with his Fists. He has got somewhat of good Nature I
believe; and because my Lord keeps me waking, he'll sweetly lull me asleep with
his Buffets. -- O this mortal Body o'mine! Lord, what a brawney two-handed Dog
it is?


I'll raise my Voice a little, that he may hear what I say, and shake and
tremble the more heartily. Pluto.


I'm wretchedly afraid then, he'll dissociate me to Quintus; and to the four
Souls he sent to Pluto, I shall be made the fifth.


Sa, sa! this is the Way.


He has got 'em both ready; now he's in his mischievous Posture.


He must ne'er hope to escape; --


Who, I wonder?


-- For that Mortal who approaches, by Jove he eats my Mutton Fists.


A way with 'em, I ne'er eat so late; besides I've supped, thank God. Good Sir,
reserve that Dish, if you please, for better Stomachs.


Methinks this Fist weighs pretty well.


I'm a dead Man. He's weighing out my Commons.


What if I neatly dress it with Opium Sauce?


That would oblige me, for I ha'nt had one wink of Sleep this three Nights.


-- But now my Blood is up, it knows no such Gentleness; one Glance of it
changes a Man's Shape. --


Here's a Fellow will change me from Head to Foot, and set me on a new Skin.


-- But a sound Buffet leaves no more Bones than a dressed Eel.


Troth, he designs to Spitchcock me, I believe. Would Old Nick had these
bloody-minded Fellows. If he spies me, I'm ho more a Man of this World.


Some stinking Fellow offends me to his Destruction, --


Waunds! I ha'nt let fly sure.


-- And he can't be far off.


Far enough lately. -- This Man's the Devil.


My Fingers itch to be at him.


If they're so hot for my sake, good Sir, cool 'em against the Walls first.


Some Voice flies this way, --


What a Blockhead was I, that didn't clip the Wings on it, since it flies so
nimbly!


-- Which provokes me to curry his Asses Hide for him!


My Hide won't bear such Bundles.


I'll try ye with a Bundle of Cuffs.


Faith, Sir, I was so tired a Ship-board, I could scarcely crawl hither; and
now I'm Sea-sick. My Legs will hardly carry single, and you mustn't think
they'll carry double.


Some body mutters there, I think.


Then I'm pretty secure; he sees me not. Who that same Some Body is, I can't
tell; for I'll take my Oath I've no other Name but Socia.


Methinks this grating Voice comes from the Right.


I'm plaguely afraid he'll fall foul upon my Bones instead o'my grating Voice.


Very well, my Gentleman comes nigher.


Lord! How I tremble and quake every Joint of me. Of my Conscience, I could not
tell what Part of the World I'm in, if any body should ask me the Question.
Alas, I can no more stir than a Statue, I'm in such a Fright. My Lords Orders
are all vanished in Smoke, and poor Socia with 'em. -- However, I'll bare up to
him briskly, and seem as valiant as I can, to try if that will save my Bacon.


Whither away, Sirrah? you that carry Fire in your Lanthorn.


Who made you an Examiner? you that make no more Bones of a Man than an Eel?


Are ye a Servant, or a Gentleman?


I'll be both if I please.


Say so, in Faith?


I do, Faith and Troth.


Sirrah, you'd be kicked.


You lye, Sir, for once.


But I'll soon make y' eat your Words.


There's no Occasion for that.


I must know where you're going, who you belong to, and what's your Business?


I'm going home; I belong to my Master. -- What are ye the wiser now?


Sirrah, I shall stop that damned foul Mouth o'yours.


'Tis past your Skill, Sir. 'Tis kept as well and as clean as any Mans.


Still so quick? Pray what's your Business at this House?


What's yours, if you go to that?


Tis the King's Command, that Guard be kept here every Night.


He does nobly to guard our House when we're in the Field. -- Prithee go and
tell the People within, that one of Amphitryon's Officers is come home.


I know nothing of your Office; but offer to stay a minute within these
Quarters, Mr. Officer, and I shall affront your Office.


I say, I belong to this House, and am Servant here.


Do ye know what t'expect? If you be not gone, I shall exalt your Worship to the
Honour --


Of what?


-- Of being carried home upon Men's Shoulders; for I'll warrant ye past
walking, if I take a good Cudgel.


For all that, I affirm my self Servant to this House.


Mark me, you long for a sound Drubbing; and you shall not fail of it, if you
don't vanish immediately.


Do ye pretend to keep me out of my own House after such a Journey?


Your House, Sirrah?


Mine, I say.


Who's your Master then?


Amphitryon, General of the Theban Forces, and Alcmena's Husband.


Hah, What's your Title pray?


Socia in our Language, Son of Davus.


You're come in an ill Hour, Monster of Impudence, with a parcel of mixed
Knaveries, and patched Lies.


I came indeed with patched Clothes, but not Lies.


That's another Lye, Sirrah, you came with your Feet, not with your Clothes.


Right, seriously.


Now, seriously, take that for your Lye.


In truth seriously, but I won't.


Troth seriously, 'tis all one; and Faith seriously, 'tis fixed, and not as you
please, Sirrah.


Good Sir, be civil.


Have ye the Impudence to say you're Socia, when I am he?


O, I'm killed.


This is but a part of your Entertainment. -- Who's Servant are ye now, Sirrah?


Yours undoubtedly; for your Fists have paid the Purchase. --


Do ye bawl, Jail-bird? -- Speak, Sirrah, what came ye here for?


To cut out Work for your Fists, Sir.


Who are ye?


I tell ye, Socia, Amphitryon's Servant.


You'll have the more for that nonsensical Lye. I say, Sirrah, I'm Socia, and
you not.


Would to Heaven you were; then you should be soundly beaten, and I not.


Dog, do ye mutter!


I'm as mute as a Fish.


Who's your Master, I say?


Who you please, Sir.


And your self; what Name have ye now?


None, till you please to bestow one.


I understood ye, Socia, Amphitryon's Servant.


'Twas my Mistake, Sir; I would have said, Sociated to Amphitryon's Service.


I was certain we had ne'er another Servant of that Name. -- You've lost the
Use of your Senses, --


Would you had lost the Use of your Fists.


For I'm that Socia you personate.


Truce a little, Good Sir; and let's have a civil Word or two, without Blows.


I agree to a Suspension of Arms, if you've any thing to propose.


Not a Dram of Proposals till the Peace be signed, since you're so plaguely
armed with those Cuffers.


Speak boldly, I'll not hurt ye.


May a Body trust ye?


Do ye question it, Sirrah?


Suppose ye deceive me?


Then Mercury shall revenge it on Socia.


Now observe, Sir. Since I've leave to speak freely, I am Socia, Amphitryon's
Man.


At it again, Sirrah?


Since the Peace is made, and the Articles signed; I affirm it to be true.


Rogue, look to your self.


You may act, Sir, as you please, as long as you are so plaguely armed with
those Cu^ers. Do your best, but, by Hercules, I ll not bate y'an Ace in this
Point.


As long as I'm here, you mustn't think to make me any thing but Socia.


Nor, Faith, shall you make me any thing but Amphitryon's Servant. I'll be
sworn, the^e's ne'er another S^cia in our Family, that attended the General
in the Army.


The Fellow's possessed with Madness.


That's your Worships Distemper. -- Amphitryon's Man Socia? Didn't I come to
Night on Shipboard from the Euboan Port? Wasn't I sent ^ither by my Lord? Don't
I stand before our own doors? Isn't this a Lanthorn in my hand? Don't I speak?
Am not I awake? Was't not I soundly drubbed just now? In good Faith, I was; and
am most sensible o'that, witness my poor Chops. -- But why aduce do I stand
fooling thus? Why don't I get into our House?


How, your House?


Certainly true.


Certainly a Lye from the Beginning to the Ending. I'm Amphitryon's Man Socia;
for this Night our Vessel returned from the Euboan Bay. We Took King Pterelas's
Town by Storm, entirely defeated the Teleboans, and Amphitryon cut off
Pterelas's Head with his own Hand.


I can scarce believe my Senses, when I hear him relate Things so: Troth he
remembers every Thing ad unguem. -- Amphitryon Presented withal?


The Golden Cup that Pterelas used to drink in.


He has hit it again. --


In a Basket, sealed with Amphitryon's Signet.


What are the Arms?


Sol rising, with his fiery Chariot. -- Do ye lye upon the Catch, Rascal?


He has mauled me with his Arguments, and I must provide me another Name. How a
fire could he see all this? I shall trap him at last; for the Devil's in him if
he tells what I did by my self in the Tent, for not a Soul was there besides. --
Socia, How did you pass away your Time in the Tent when both Armies were
engaged? -- Tell me but that, and I yield.


There stood a Pipe of Wine; from whence I filled out a Jack, --


Exactly right.


And swallowed it down pure, as it came from the Grape.


O the Devil! He must have hid himself in that Jack: Certainly so; for I drunk
it without a drop of Water in it.


What now? Are ye satisfied you're none of Socia?


Will you prove it?


What need of Proofs, when I'm he?


By Jove I'm he, and 'tis as true as the Gospel.


By Mercury, Jove won't believe ye a Tittle: And I'm sure he'll take my Word,
sooner than your Oath.


Who am I, if I be not Socia? Answer me that.


When I'm weary of being Socia, you may be Socia again. But, now I'm he, I'll
beat ye to mummy, you scoundrel Dog, if you don't troop off.


By the Mackins, now I view his Phiz well, methinks I see the very same Air and
Men I've often seen in a Glass, he's so damnably like me. The very same Hat,
and Coat, for all the World; he has a plaguy Resemblance of me. Let me see,
Calves, Feet, Height, Baldness, Eyes, Nose, Teeth, Lips, Jaws, Chin, Beard,
Neck; in fine, right me all over. If his Back were but as well laced with some
certain Scars, two Peas could not be more alike. -- But now I recollect my
self, know I'm undoubtedly the same Person as ever, know my Master, know this
House, find that I've my Wit and Senses about me, I'll be hanged if I believe a
Word of this Stuff. I'll knock at a Venture.


Whither go ye, Sirrah?


Home.


Do; and were you mounted on Iove's Chariot in its full Career, it shou'dn't
protect ye.


May not I deliver a civil Message to my Lady?


To your own Lady, what you please; but no Message to mine. If ye once provoke
me, I'll make all your Bones rattle i'your Hide.


I'll use my Legs first. --


SO, Gentlemen, Things go rarely, and prosperously on our side. I've removed
the greatest Obstacle, so that my Father may securely reap the Fruit of his
Cuckoldom. -- Now when this Fellow comes to tell his Master, That his Servant
Socia drive him from the Door, he'll take it for a damned Lye, and believe the
Rogue was ne'er there, as he ordered him. Thus shall I bring them two, and the
whole Family, into nothing but Mistakes and Confusion, till my Father have had
his Belly full of his Mistress. But at last they'll come to a right
Understanding of all Things, and Jove will bring his Mistress into as great
Favour with her Husband as ever. For certainly, Amphitryon will be in a plaguy
fret, and call his Wife Whore; but my Father will reconcile all Differences.

Now, Gallants, for something about Alcmena; for I've said little of her yet.
This Day shall she be brought to Bed of two Boys, one of ten Months growth, the
other of seven; the first by Amphitryon, the second by Jupiter; so the youngest
Child will have the Superiority by his Father, and the eldest the Inferiority by
his. Do ye comprehend the Mystery? -- However my Father's so tender of Alcmena,
he'll have both come together, and both the painful Labours at one Lying-in; and
likewise to prevent all Suspicions of Scandal on her side, and Cuckoldom on
his. 'Tis true, Amphitryon, as I said before, will know all. But granting that,
no body will think the worse of Alcmena for it; for 'tis beneath a Deity to
suffer a poor Mortal to bear the Blame of his own failings. -- Hold, I must
shorten my Story; the Door goes; and here comes Amphitryon in Effigy, with
Alcmena, a Wife he has taken up at Usury.

Farewell, my dear Alcmena: Pray be careful of the main Chance, and don't worry
your self; you see you're gone your full time. I'm obliged to leave ye now, and
prithee take care of the bringing up the Child.


What pressing Affairs can ye have, my Lord, to drive ye away in such haste?


Upon Honour, 'tis n't your Company, or any thing in the House I'm weary of: But
when a General's from his Army, Disorders will follow soone^ than good
Discipline.


Troth, my Daddy's the cleveres^ Impostor. How sweetly he smuggles the Lady?


Yes, indeed, I find what a wonderful Kindness ye have for your poor Wife.


Why, I love ye more than any other of your Sex; won't that satisfy ye?


Faith, Father mine; if your Lady should find out the Cheat, I'll be sworn
you'd gladly change your Ioveship to be plain Amphitryon.


I'd rather experience your Love, than fancy't. You leave me before you were
well warm i'your Bed. You came to me at Mid-night, and presently after, you're
gone; Is this kindly done?


I'll to her, and tickle her up as my Father has done. --


Rascal, I know your Tricks, Out o'my sight. How dare you meddle in our
Business, Rogue? If I take my Cane, I'll --


Let him alone, my Dear.


Speak another Word, Sirrah --


My first wheedling Complement succeeded but very indifferently.


For what you complain of, my Dear, in truth you must not be angry with me. I
left my Army Incognito, to fly to your Embraces, and be the first kind
Messenger of my Fortune in the Public, and of all that passed abroad. Could I
have done this if I loved after an ord'nary rate?


Just as I said. How this stroking cheers her.


I must return Incognito too; for if I'm once discovered, the censorious World
will say, I much preferred a Wife to the Public.


'Tis a doleful Departure for your Alcmena.


Pray don't spoil those pretty Eyes. I'll be back in a moment.


'Twill be a long time to that moment.


'Tis with vast Regret I go, and part from ye thus.


So it seems, indeed, by your coming and parting in the same Night.


Why dost hold me? 'Tis high time now; for I must be out of the City before
Day-light. In the mean time I present ye with this Golden Cup, the Reward of my
Success, and the very same that Pterelas drunk in, whom I slew with my own hand.



Now you keep close to your old Kindness. -- By Heaven, a noble Gift, worthy of
the Giver.


A noble Gift indeed, and worthy of the Receiver.


At it again, Rascal? Can I never beat y' into better Manners?


Pray, my Lord, be not angry with poor Socia upon my Account.


I can deny you nothing.


This same Gallanting has put him damnably out of Humour.


Dost want any thing else, my Love?


Nothing, my Lord, but to have ye love me absent as well as present.


Let's be going, Sir; 'tis just Break of Day.


Go you besote, Socia; I'll follow immediately.


Hast any thing more to ask?


Yes, my Lord, your speedy Return.


It shall be. -- I'll be with ye again before y'expect me: mean time, pray be
satisfied.


Now, Goddess Night, who has waited so long, I dismiss ye. Make room for the
Day, to cherish Mortals with a bright and glorious Sunshine. -- Mercury.


COme Sirrah, follow me.


That I will, and close at your Heels.


You're the most villainous Rascal!


Why, good Sir?


For venting such Stuff, that neither is, was, or can be true.


Marry, Sir, you keep to your laudable Custom of never believing your own
Servants.


How, Sirrah, what Custom? -- By Heaven I shall snip that rascally Tongue
o'yours.


I'm your Slave, Sir, and you may use me according to your Pleasure and
Convenience. But I've spoke nothing but Truth, and you can't make me eat my
Words.


You impudent Dog, didn't ye say you were at home and here at the same time?


'Twas nothing but truth, Sir.


The Devil! -- take ye, or I'll kick ye to him.


I'm i'your Power, and must bear it if ye do.


Slave, dare ye put Tricks upon your Master? Have ye the Impudence to face down
that which never Man saw, or can see? Is't possible for a Man to be here and
there at the same time?


Faith, Sir, just as I tell ye.


The Devil lye ye for a Rogue.


How have I deserved this at your hands?


How, Rascal, when you make me your Maygame?


If I did, I should justly deserve it. But really, Sir, 'tis no Lye; I tell ye
nothing but plain matter of Fact.


The Fellow's drunk, I think.


Troth, would I were.


You've that Wish already.


I, Sir?


Yes, you. -- Where ha'ye been drinking?


Not a drop have I drunk to day.


What manner o'Man was this --


Troth I told ye ha'f a score times. -- I say, Sir, I Socia am now at home;
(do ye mind?) and the same numerical Socia am here too. Now, Sir, I think I've
made Things as plain and clear as the Sun.


Plague! -- Out of my Sight.


Why, Sir?


You're infected.


Why do ye think so? Truly, Sir, I'm pretty well in Body and Mind, thank God.


As sure as you're a Rogue, I shall make ye a little worse in Body and Mind, i^
I get once well in. -- Come along, Rogue, you that abuse your Master with such
Stuff as would make a Dog sick to hear it. Because you shamefully neglected
your Business, you come impudently to jeer me with impossible and unheard of
Stories, you Rascal. But I'll have every Lye marked out upon your Back.


This, Sir, is the greatest Plague in the World to a good Servant; whenever he
tells his Master the Truth, he must have it rammed down his Throat.


How a plague could this be? Give me some reasonable Proof of your being here
and at home too: I'd fain see that.


Really, Sir, I am both here and there too. A Body would think it plaguy
strange. But, I'll swear, it can't be more strange to you, than 'tis to me,
Sir.


How do ye mean?


I only say 'tis not more strange to you than me. For let me be hanged, if this
same Me-Socia believed a word of it, till that same I-Socia beat it into my
Head. He gave me such a particular Account of all that passed in the Army this
Campaign; then he had got my very Shape and Name, so that two drops of Water
are not more alike than the other I to Me. -- For when you, my Lord, sent me
betimes in the Morning from the Port, --


What then?


-- I came to the Door a good while before I arrived.


'Sdeath what Stuff's this? -- Are ye quite mad?


Just as you see me, Sir.


The Fellow's bewitched, and fallen into some ill hands, since I sent him away.


Ill hands indeed; for their Fists have mauled me confoundedly.


Who beat ye so?


The other I beat Me.


Sirrah, answer me nothing but what I ask. -- First let me know who this same
Socia is.


He's your Servant.


Mine? I've one too many by you; but ne'er had another Servant Socia since I
was born.


But now, Sir, I promise to show ye another Socia as soon as you get in, a
Servant of yours, Son of Davus, of my Shape, and my Age. In fine, your Socia's
become double.


These are all Riddles. -- But saw ye my Wife?


I was not permitted to enter the House.


What hindered ye?


That same He-Socia I've been talking of; he who so belabour'd me.


What He-Socia do ye mean?


I tell ye I. How often must I tell it?


Hark ye, Friend, had not you been sleeping the while?


Not a Wink, Sir.


Perhaps you saw this Socia in a Dream?


I ne'er used to dream out my Master's Commands. Awake, I saw him; awake, I see
you; awake, I talk; and awake I was, when that waking Dog beat me.


What Dog?


That I-He-Socia, I tell ye. Lord, can't ye understand me?


How a plague should a Man understand this ridiculous Banter?


You'll immediately know --


What?


-- Your other Socia, my Partner.


Follow me then; for first I'll have this Business cleared. -- See that all
Things be brought from our Vessel as I ordered.


I'm as diligent and careful to obey you as possible. I have not swallowed your
Commands with my Drink.


Pray Heaven, all this don't prove true.


How poor and short are this Life's Pleasures, if once compared with the
Sorrows we endure? 'Tis Mans Destiny, and Heavens Pleasure, to mix our Joys
with bitter Potions; and for some few Hours of Satisfaction, we meet with Ages
of Ills and Troubles. I now experience it, and my self's a plain Witness of
this: How short was this last Pleasure! I had the Privilege of one Nights
Company with my Lord; and then, snatched away before the Morning. Methinks I'm
the most desolate of Widows in the Absence of the Man I love 'bove all the
World; and his Departure carries more of my Soul away, than his Arrival brought
with it: However this joys my Heart, to see him Victorious over his dreadful
Foes, and laden with Honours; 'tis that I live upon. He's gone; but since he
returns with deserved Glory, I'll patiently bear his Absence, with all the
Firmness and Courage of a Woman; and shall think my Troubles well rewarded, in
a Husband crowned with the Name of Conqueror. For Valour's of all Rewards the
greatest; preferable to all Things else; the sole Defender and Protector of our
Liberties, Safeties, Lives, Estates, Parents, Countries, and Children. Valour
carries all Virtues in it self, and all Perfections still attend the Valiant
Man.


Heavens! how welcome shall I be to my Alcmena's Arms, where both our Loves are
mutual; especially after such a famous Victory, beyond all Expectations,
routing 'em in the first Battle by my own Command and Conduct. Certainly she'll
be very impatient for my Return.


How, Sir? Do ye think my Spouse won't be every whit as impatient for mine?


O, my Lord's come!


Keep close, Sirrah.


But why should he come back, when he seemed in such haste? Was it only a
Trial? If his Design be to see how I could relish his Departure, truly he shall
be welcome however.


O, good Sir, we had better return to our Vessel.


Why so?


We shall have nothing to eat here.


How came that into your Head?


Because Dinner's over already.


How so?


Why there's your Lady has dined, by her Belly.


Po, Blockhead, I left her with Child when I went to the Campaign.


Then woe to poor Socia.


What's the matter?


I'm come home in the nick of time to be worry'd to death with drawing Water
for her Bath; for, according to your Account, she's just upon laying down.


Pluck up a good Heart.


Do ye know what a Heart I've got? For if once I begin to manage the Bucket,
Faith, Sir, I'm the very'st Rogue upon Earth, if I don't draw out the Hearts
blood of the Well.


Come along, I'll have another for that Employment; fear nothing.


I think, I shall better show my Respects if I go and meet him.


Oh, how I'm charmed to find my Alcmena in these longing Arms! whom I count
beyond Comparison in Thebes, and the World counts a Pattern of all Virtue. --
How has't been with ye, all this time? Did not ye long for my Return, my Dear?


I see no wonderful Signs of longing. I'm sure no body can out-fawn a Dog.


I'm extremely glad to find ye so well, just upon your lying down.


In the Name of Goodness, my Lord, why should you play upon me thus? You
complement as if you had not seen me lately, but were just come from the Army;
and accost me like one long absent from his Wife.


True indeed; till now I had no sight of ye.


What makes ye say so?


'Tis my Custom to speak Truth.


You don't do well to break so good a Custom. But is it for a Trial of my Love?
-- Raillery apart; why so soon returned? Was it some ill Omen, or Weather, that
stayed your going to your Army, as you lately told me?


Lately! How lately could that be?


Have ye any Design in that Question? -- Very lately, just now, but a moment
since.


Pray how is it possible, as you say, to be so lately, and but a moment since?


Do ye think, my Lord, I'd so meanly trifle as you do, when you pretend you were
not here, and left me but just now?


She seems much discomposed.


A little Patience, Sir, till she has slept out her sleep.


Do ye dream with your Eyes open?


No, by my Soul, I'm thoroughly awake; and without dreaming, tell you all that
passed: For I saw ye both, this Morning before Day-light.


At what Place?


Your own House.


I ne'er was there.


Do'nt be too positive, Sir; our Vessel, perhaps, brought us from the Port, and
we all asleep.


Have you got into the same Vein too?


What would y'ha'me do, Sir? Don't ye know the old Saying, Cross a Madman, and
he's the Devil; humour him, and 'tis as good as Physic.


Hah, Rogue! --


Truly 'tis but reasonable to show some Anger, since she ga' me so cold a
Welcome.


You'd as good piss in a Be Hive.


Hold your Tongue. -- Alcmena, answer me one Question.


What Question? Let's hear't.


Is't Madness or Pride that has infected ye?


How came such a Question into your Head, my Lord?


Because in my former Journeys y'us'd to receive me as all other virtuous Wives
do: But now I meet with a quite different Welcome.


As I hope to live, yesterday I received y' as a Wife ought, my Lord; enquired
after your Health, pressed your hand, and met ye with a Kiss.


Did ye speak to my Lord yesterday, Madam?


And to you too, Socia.


My Lord, I was in hopes of your Honour's having an Heir; but o'my Conscience
your Lady's not big with Child.


With what then?


With Fool.


Truly I've no such Distemper, as I hope for a safe Deliverance. -- But if my
Lord would but give ye your due, Mr. Fortune Teller, you'd soon reap the
mischievous Fruits of your saucy Predictions.


Yes, Madam, there are Fruits too, of Lying-in Women, and Fruits too, to
strengthen their Hearts, and keep 'em from swooning.


You see me here yesterday?


I say I did, if you must needs have it so often.


In a Dream, perhaps.


Nay, we were both awake as possible.


Mercy upon me!


What's the matter, Sir?


My Wife's mad.


She's melancholy, and that's the high Road to it.


When found ye the rise of this Disease, Alcmena?


Upon my Soul I ne'er was better, and sounder in my Life.


Why then do ye pretend to have seen me yesterday, when I put into Port but last
night? There supped, and lodged all night in the Vessel. I ne'er set foot in
Thebes since the Teleboan Expedition, till now we conquered.


'Twas me you supped with, and me you lay with.


What say ye?


Nothing but truth.


By Heaven not i'this; in other things, I know not.


Betimes in the morning you went to your Army.


How can all this be?


Very right; she tells her Dream as 'tis fresh in memory. -- But, Madam, Jove,
the Disperser of such Prodigies, ought to have had his Cake, or his Incense
offered this Morning.


How saucily the Fellow snaps me up; and you suffer him.


Leave your prating, Sirrah. -- You say I left ye betimes in the morning?


Who else could tell me the Particulars of the Battle?


And heard ye of that too?


Why truly 'twas you told me how you stormed their chief Town, and slew King
Pterelas with your own hands.


I tell ye so?


Yes, you; Socia heard ye.


Did you hear me tell any such thing, Socia?


Where should I hear't?


Nay, let her tell ye that.


Troth, Madam, I ne'er was present at any such Relation, as I know of.


No wonder if he says as you'd have him.


Come hither, Socia; look of my Face --


I do, Sir.


Now speak the truth without the least Flattery. Did you hear me tell her one
word of what she pretends?


Bless me! have you your Senses too, and ask such a Question? Faith, Sir, this
is the first time I saw ye together.


Now, Madam, do ye hear what he says?


Yes indeed, and know it to be false.


What, believe neither Servant nor Husband?


Neither; because of such Evidence, and the certainty of what I affirm.


D'y'affirm my Arrival yesterday?


Do ye deny your Departure this Morning?


I do; and protest this is my first Appearance.


Good now, and you'll deny you ga' me the Golden Cup too, which you say was
there presented ye?


Upon Honour, I neither gave it nor said it. 'Tis true, I was so designed, and
am still. -- But pray who told ye of that?


Your self was both Teller and Giver.


Hold, hold, I beseech ye. -- This is amazing, Socia, that she should know of
my being presented with this Cup. Except you saw her, and told her all.


Let me be hanged if I e're told, or saw her till now.


What Woman's that?


Would y' have the Cup produced?


By all means.


It shall then. -- Thessala, step into my Chamber for the Golden Cup my Lord
ga'me this Morning.


Come this way, Socia. --


Can ye suppose that, when I've got it here in the Casket sealed with your own
Signet.


Is the Seal whole?


Look, Sir, to be sure.


Just, as I signed it.


Pray, Sir, must we deal with my Lady as a Person cracked brain?


In faith, and so we had need. For upon my word she's over-run with
Extravagancies.


What need of Words? Here's Demonstration! look ye.


Pray let's see it.


Come, view it well, you who so obstinately deny matter of Fact; and be
convinced before all the World. -- Is n't it the same you were presented with?


O Heavens! Where are my Eyes? The very same upon Honour. I'm all in Confusion,
Socia.


Marry, here must be damnable Witchcraft, or the Cup's here still.


Come, break open the Casket.


Why should I break it open? the Seal's firm; and makes well for us. -- You, my
Lord, has brought forth another Amphitryon; I, another Socia; now, if the Cup
has engendered too, we're all three double.


I'll have it broke open, and looked into.


Hold, Sir, look of the Seal once more, that afterwards I may not be brought in
for Burglary.


Open it quickly; she'll run us down, and think us mad else.


Where think ye I should have this, but from you who ga' me't?


That's my business to enquire into.


Heaven have mercy upon my Soul!


What ails the Fellow?


The Cup's flown out of the Nest.


What say ye?


Nothing but truth.


An unlucky truth to you, if it be gone.


Why here 'tis apparently.


Who gave't ye?


The same who asks the Question.


You're upon the catch, my Lord. You stole slyly out of the Ship some back-way,
with the Cup, presented it to my Lady, then privately sealed up the Casket
again.


Hah! you sooth her in her Madness too. -- But once more, do y' affirm I was
here yesterday?


I do; and, at our first Interview, saluted each other, and met with a Kiss.


I could have spared that Kindness. --


You bathed your self.


What next?


Sat down at the Table.


Ha, ha, best of all! now Catechise her, Sir.


Don't interrupt, Sirrah. -- On with your Story.


Supper was served up, we sat down, and supped both together.


At the same Table?


Yes.


Shame on it! I don't like that Entertainment.


Leave fooling. -- We supped together; what then?


You complained o'drowsiness; Supper was taken away, and together we went up to
Bed.


Where did you lay?


In the same Chamber and Bed with your self.


Ruined then!


What's the matter, Sir?


Stabbed to the Heart?


What ails ye, my Lord?


Let me alone.


What's done t'ye, Sir?


I'm a miserable Man; basely dishonoured by my Wife in my Absence.


In good earnest, my Lord, why this hard Censure from your Mouth?


Am I your Lord? Prithee don't give me a wrong Title.


A very pretty Business; if she has taken away his Manhood, and made him a
Lady.


What have I done, to make y' use me thus?


You declare your Crimes, then ask me how you've offended.


Is't an Offence to lye with my own Husband?


With me? Was there ever such prodigious Impudence? If you'd lost all Sense of
Honour, sure you might have borrowed of your Neighbours.


Our Family was ne'er guilty of such Crimes; and if my Honour's Ruin by your
Aim, you'll lose your Labour.


Bless my Soul! -- Sure you know me, Socia.


Pretty well, Sir.


Didn't I sup last Night in your Vessel at the Euboan Port?


I've s^fficient Evidence to prove what I say.


Evidence, who are they?


Evidence I say.


What will they give in? -- But, one's sufficient; for, here was no body but
Socia.


Marry, I don't know what to make of all this, unless there be another
Amphitryon, who in your Absence takes care of your Business, and your Lady's
too. I thought it plaguy strange to find a Deputy Socia* but in faith a second
Amphitryon's a greater wonder. Certainly some Enchantments have been practised
upon your Lady.


By Heaven, and by all that's good, which Oaths to me are all sacred, I ne'er
gave to any Man but you, the least Liberty that could call my Honour in
question.


Heaven make it true.


I affirm it is, but in vain, since you won't believe.


You're a Woman, and swear too boldly.


Innocence ought to be bold, and to vindicate it self with a Confidence, and
Haughtiness.


Here's Boldness enough.


No more than becomes Virtue.


We've your word for that.


I don't, like others, esteem a little Dirt my Portion, but my Continency, and
Honour, my Moderating my Passions, my Fear of Heaven, Duty to my Parents, Love
to my Kindred, Obedience to my Husband, my liberal Bounty to the Good, and my
Care over the Virtuous.


I'faith, if all this be true, certainly she's the very Map of Innocence.


I'm so strangely confounded, I scarce know where I am.


Certainly you must be my Lord Amphitryon still. But have a great care you
don't get into the new Fashion; for here's nothing but Metamorphoses since our
Arrival.


Madam, I'm resolved to search to the very bottom of this Business.


Do it a Gods Name.


What say ye? -- Answer me to this: Suppose I bring from the Port, your Kinsman
Naucrates, who came over in the same Vessel with me? If he disproves all your
Assertions, what Treatment do ye deserve then? What Plea will ye find to save
your Divorce and Portion?


If I fail in my part, I'll urge none.


Agreed. -- Socia, Conduct these Prisoners into the House. -- I'll away to our
Vessel, and bring home Naucrates.


Now we are by our selves, Madam, tell me seriously, whether I have not within
Doors a Brother Socia, just like me for all the World?


Out of my sight, Rascal, who art fit for nothing but thy Master.


I'll vanish at your Commands.


Bless me! '^is very strange it should come into my Lords H^d t'accuse me thus
wrongfully. Whatever the Matter be, my Cozen Naucrates will clear all.


GEntlemen, I'm still Amphitryon, and have a Servant Socia; who, when occasion
serves, shall be Mercury again. My Lodgings are in the upper Garret, where I'm
Jove as often as I please. But when e're I come down, I change my Garb, and
become Amphitryon in a trice. -- It's for your sakes, Gentlemen, I'm come here
now, to make the Comedy complete; and at the same time to protect poor
Alcmena's Honour against her Husbands false Accusations: For 'twould be a piece
of Baseness to suffer my Crimes to fall upon her Head. -- Now will I reassume
Amphitryon's Person, and once more put the grand Sham upon the whole Family:
But then I'll clear all at last, assist Alcmena in due time, and at once have
her delivered of both mine and her Husbands Child, and that without any pain.
-- I ordered Mercury to be here immediately, and receive his Commands. -- Now
I'll go to her.


The House is grown odious to m^ no^; since my Lord accuses me of Dishones^y,
Shame and Infamy. He denies plain Matters of Fact, and exclaims against me
strangely; he affirms what never was, and blames me for what I'm innocent of;
after all, thinks I'll tamely sit down and bear all. But as I'm a living Soul,
he's mistaken; for I'll not suffer the unjust Scandal of Whore: No, I'll part
first, unless he makes me ample Satisfaction, and swears he repents of his
unjust Accusation.


That I must do in good earnest, if I ever hope for a kind Reception. For
seeing my Tricks fall heavy upon Amphitryon's Head, and my Love proves
injurious to this innocent Creature, I must expect some Anger and hard Words
for what I'm innocent of too.


Oh! here's the Person who accuses his poor Wife of Shame, and Infamy.


Madam, I'd willingly talk with ye. --


'Tis my Nature to serve my Enemies so.


Bless me! your Enemies?


Yes truly, my Enemies; unless you'll pretend this is false too.


Now you're too nicely reserved.


Pray let my alone. -- I'm sure had y'either Wit or Discretion, or weren't the
greatest Fool in Nature, you'd ne'er hold Discourse, either in Mirth or
Earnest, with the Woman you believe, and declare a Strumpet.


If I did, you're ne'er the worse, no not in my Opinion; therefore I return to
beg your Pardon, my Dear: For no Torment has been so great to me, as the
Apprehensions of your Displeasure. -- Why did name such a thing? I'll clear
all t'ye. Upon Honour, I ne'er mistrusted your Fidelity; I had only a mind to
try your Temper, and how you could bear what I said. 'Twas all but a little
harmless Raillery for sport-sake; ask Socia else.


But why wasn't my Cozen Naucrates brought hither, as you pretended, to prove
you ne'er were here before?


What's spoken in Jest, my Dear, ought never to be taken in Earnest.


I'm sure there was enough to make my heart ache.


Dear Alcmena, by this fair Hand, let me beg, and entreat ye, to forgive,
forget, and be pacified.


My unspotted Honour's above all Scandal; and since you've owned me free from
all base Acts, I would be as free from all base Suspicions. -- Farewell, keep
your own Things, and let me have mine. Pray send my Women after me, t'accompany
me.


Sure y' ar' n't mad?


If you will not, I'll go alone; my Virtue shall be my Companion.


Pray stay; I propose this Oath to your Discretion. -- I do sincerely believe
my Wife to be most Virtuous; which if I falsify, may Iove's eternal Wrath fall
upon Amphitryon's head.


Ah, his Mercy rather.


I hope 'twill prove so; for I'm sure I've truly sworn. -- Now I hope you're
satisfied.


I am.


I'm glad of't. -- A Man in his life-time, meets with a thousand such Accidents
as these, sometimes Pleasures, othertimes Troubles, by and by Fallings out,
then Reconciliations again. But whenever these little Love. Quarrels happen,
and those made up, the pleasing Passion's doubled.


Your ill Words might well have been spared, my Lord: but if you make me such
Satisfaction, I ought to forget all.


Pray order all my Sacred Vessels to be got ready, to perform those Vows I made
in the Campaign, if ever I got safe home again.


I will.


Send out Socia there; I must send him for Blepharon, our Ships Pilot, t'invite
him to Dinner. -- But not a mouthful shall Socia get; and here'll be rare sport
when I come to grapple with Amphitryon, and send him packing.


I wonder what he's talking of to himself. -- But the Door goes. -- Here comes
Socia.


O, my Lord, I'm ready: if there be occasion, lay your Commands upon me, and
I'll obey 'em.


You're come in good time.


Pray, Sir, is't Peace or War between ye? -- I'm glad to see ye both in a
peaceable Posture, and 'tis a great Satisfaction to me. Truly 'tis a good
Servants Duty to sympathise with his Master, to be as he is, look as he looks,
be sad when he's sad, and merry when he's pleased. -- But, good Sir, tell me;
is there an amicable Accommodation?


You jeer now; you know we were only in laughing.


In laughing, said ye? In faith, I thought ye never more in earnest i'your
Life.


I've satisfied her, and made my peace.


Excellent, in truth.


I've a Sacrifice to make, according to my Vows.


I perceive as much.


You must go to Blepharon, the Pilot of our Ship, and desire him, from me, to
be here at the Ceremony, and take a Dinner with me.


I'll be back again before you can think me there.


Well, make haste then.


Shall I go in, my Lord, and help to get Things ready as occasion shall serve?


By all means, Madam; and prepare all Things as well as you can.


Come in as soon as you please, and you'll find nothing out of order.


Very well* this is like a loving Wife.


So, both Lady and Servant over-reach'd, in taking me for Amphitryon: Mistaken
to some purpose! -- Now, immortal Socia, be ready at hand, (you hear me though
you're absent) and don't fail of finding some Artifice to drive away Amphitryon
when he comes: Remember't. I'd have ye trifle away the time with him, while I
conform my self to this same borrowed Wife. Don't deceive me, but serve me
according to my Intentions; and, besure be in readiness to assist me, the mean
time that I'm sacrificing to my self.


ROom here! Clear the way! All the World make room! and let not a Soul be so
desperately mad as to stop my Journey --


TRoth, Gentlemen, why shou'dn't my Deityship give me the same Privilege of
threatening the Mob, when they stand in my way, as the Slaves in Comedies have?
Their vast haste is only for a Vessel safely arrived, an old Fellow upon the
fret, or so; but I, Jove's Messenger, and sent by his Commands, have more reason
to call for room, and clear all before me. -- My Father he calls, I follow; his
Word's my Law, and I obey him with all the Submission of a dutiful Son. I sooth
him in his Wenching, encourage him, pimp for him, counsel him, and rejoice with
him; and whenever he receives a Pleasure, it proves ten times as much to me.
Does he long for a Girl? He does well and wisely to satisfy his longing; a
Thing all wise Men ought to observe, provided it be safe. Now 'tis my Father's
Will and Pleasure, to impose upon Amphitryon: Troth I do it nobly. -- I'll do it
immediately, Gentlemen, before your Faces. I'll whip on a Chaplet, pretend to
be drunk, and get my self above. From thence I'll send him with a Vengeance, as
soon as he approaches, and make him dry drunk, I'll warrant him. Next, Socia
must go to Pot; and be condemned for what I did. But what's that to me? 'Tis my
Business to obey my Father's Commands, and observe his Pleasure. -- Amphitryon.
I shall make admirable Sport with him, if you'll please to favour me with your
Silence. -- I'll in, and adorn my self like a Drunkard: Then I'll ascend the
House, and from thence do his Business for him.


I could not meet with Naucrates at his Vessel for my Life, nor at home neither,
or so much as a Soul in the City who had seen him. I've been hunting for him
through every Alley, among the Armourers and Perfumers, at the Change, the
Shambles, the Race-Ground, the Markets, the Apothecaries and Barbers Shops, and
at all the Temples in Town. I'm wearied off my Legs, and no Naucrates to be
found high nor low. -- I'll e'e^ go home, and make a further Enquiry o'my Wife,
to find out this Person that dishonoured my Bed in my Absence. 'Tis more than
Death to me to let the Business thus hang in suspense. --


Who's at the Door?


'Tis I.


I; what I?


I, I tell ye.


Sure the Devil and his Dam has possessed ye, for bouncing at our Doors.


How? --


So, as to make y' a poor Rogue as long as you've a day to live.


Socia!


That's my Name indeed; except you think I've lost my Memory. -- What's your
Business?


Rascal, have ye the Impudence to enquire after my Business?


Yes marry have I. -- Why, you Blockhead, you've almost thrown the Door off the
Hinges. Do ye think our Doors are made at the public Charge? -- What makes ye
stare so, Bufflehead? What's your Business, I say? And who are ye?


Varlet, how dare y' ask such a Question? Thou cursed branded Rogue! As I'm a
living Soul, I'll drub ye to some tune for all your Sauciness?


Certainly you must have been a prodigal Dog in your time.


Why so, Sirrah?


Because i'your old Days you're forced to come begging to me for a Beating.


Thy Back, Slave, shall soundly pay for all this.


Then I shall sacrifice --


What?


Something to your Worships Pa^e.


You, Jail-bird? -- If I live and do well, I'll hang y' up by the heels, with
your Skin stripped o'e^ your Ears, and make a Sacrifice of you. -- Out of your
Castle, you cursed Rascal.


Poor Phantom, dost think to fright me with big Words? -- But if you don't take
ye to your Heels quickly, or offer to knock, or touch the Door with a finger,
I'll hit ye such a douce of the Chaps with this Tile, as shall dash out your
Teeth and Tongue together.


Damned Villain, Will ye shut my out of my own House? and keep me from knocking
at my own Door? I'll make the Doors fly presently.


Do ye persist, Sirrah?


Yes, Rogue.


Have at your Corps then.


Cursed Slave, throw upon your Lord and Master? If I do once lay hands on ye,
I'll make ye a perpetual Example to all Rogues.


Y' ought to get your Brains cleared, y' old Fool!


Why, Sirrah?


For calling me your Servant.


What if I do?


Then you'd better be hanged; for I own no Master but Amphitryon.


Sure I had not lost my Shape? I'm startled at Socia's denying me. But I'll try
him further. -- Amphitryon?


Amphitryon? A Mad-man rather Didn't I tell ye, Old Fool, that your Brains
should be cleared, when y' asked others who you're. -- Begone, I advise ye, and
make no Disturbance here, for my Lord Amphitryon's just come home from the
Campaign, and retired with his Lady to Bed.


What Lady?


Alcmena.


But what Man is't?


How often must I tell ye? -- My Lord Amphitryon. Trouble us no further.


Who does he lye with?


Have a care your fooling with me don't bring an old House upon your Head.


Nay, good Socia, tell me that.


Now you're a Peg lower. -- With Alemena then.


Lye with her?


Ay, I think so; and upon her too.


I'm a lost Man.


What he calls Loss, is clear Gains. For, to let out ones Wife, is as good as
farming out a barren piece of Ground to good Husbandmen.


Socia!


What a plague mean ye by Socia?


Don't ye know me, Slave?


Yes, for an impertinent quarrelsome Coxcomb.


Still in that vein? -- Am not I thy Master Amphitryon?


Some Tom a Bedlam I think, not Amphitryon. How often must I tell ye so? Would
ye hea^'t once more? My Master Amphitryon's now at Bed with Alcmena. -- Stay
here any longer, I'll send him out with a Devil t'ye.


That I'd fain see. -- Pray Heaven my public Services be not rewarded with loss
of Country, House, Wife, Family, and Shape too.


I'll send him t'ye; but in the mean time retire a while. For I believe the
Sacrifice is ready, and they'll to Dinner presently. But if you chance to be
impertinent, you'll go nigh to be sacrificed your self.


Heavens bless me! What strange Madness has seized upon our Family? What
Prodigies have I seen since this last Journey? Now I'm apt to credit the old
Fable as true, that in Arcadia, the Attic People were transformed into savage
Beasts, so that their Parents and Friends could never know 'em after. --


-- How's this, Socia? 'Tis the strangest Story I ever heard. Did ye meet with
another Socia at the Door just of your own Shape, say ye?


Yes. -- But hark ye, Sir; since I've spawned another Socia, and my Lord
another Amphitryon, who knows but you may another Belpharon. Would to Heaven
you were but as well convinced, at the Expense of a swelled Chaps, broken
Teeth, and an empty Belly as I am. For the other I-Socia, that am yonder,
swindg'd me, and made a poor Rogue of me.


Prodigious, I swear! -- But let's mend our Pace though, for yonder's his
Lordship staying for us; and truly my Stomach begins to wamble.


-- But why do I mention Foreign Prodigies; since we're told stranger Stories
of our City's Founder? This mighty Prince, in quest of Europa, slew the
dreadful Monster, from whose scattered Teeth sprung Armed Troops, in order
ranged, where Brothers baited Brothers to Death. After all, Epirus saw the same
great Person and his Wife, crawl about in Serpents Shapes. All this was great
Iove's Will, and the Decree of Fate. The best of our Family have had their
noble Exploits rewarded with dire Misfortunes. 'Tis my Destiny, and I must
sustain these Shocks of Misery, and take off these unsufferable Potions. --


Mr. Blepharon!


What?


My Mind misgives me plaguely.


Why.


Look ye; yonder he walks before his Door, waiting like a Parasite to bid his
Lordship Good morrow.


'Tis only to catch himself a Stomach.


Very ingeniously contrived: So he has secured his Doors for fear it should
come too soon.


You're in the jeering Vein.


Nor yet in the snarling. -- Observe a little, if you please. -- He's talking
to himself, if I knew what 'tis; and I believe he's hammering at some plaguy
Business. -- I'll listen to his Discourse. -- Stand still a while.


-- O how I fear that the Gods should bereave me of the Honour of this Victory.
I find my whole Family possessed with strange Extravagancies. Then my Wives
Disloyalty and Infamy goes to the heart of me. But the Cup quite startles me;
for 'twas as well Sealed as possible. -- How can it be? My Wife relates all the
Particulars of the Battle, particularly that Pterelas was slain by my own
Hands. -- Ho, ho, I've found out the Trick at last. This was all Socia's
Roguery, who but just now had the Impudence to shut my out of my own House; --


So, my Name's brought up, but with a plaguy harsh Sound. -- Pray let's keep
off a little while, till his whole Passion be discharged.


How you will for that.


-- But could I but lay hands of that Rascal, I'd teach him to deceive, abuse,
and hector his own Master.


Do ye hear him, Sir?


Yes.


The Storm is just breaking upon my Shoulders. -- We must go up to him; for you
know the old Saying --


I know nothing of your Sayings; but I've a nigh guessing at your Sufferings.


'Tis an old Proverb, That an empty Belly and a slack Guest, makes one as mad
as the Devil.


Very true, we'll meet him immediately. -- My Lord Amphitryon!


'Tis Blepharon's Voice. I wonder what's his Business with me. However, he comes
very luckily to be a Witness of my Wives Baseness. -- Blepharon; what have you
to say to me?


Has your Honour forgot you sent Socia to our Vessel this Morning t'invite me
to Dinner?


I ne'er so much as thought of't. -- But where's that Villain?


Who?


Socia.


There he is.


Where?


Just before ye. -- Don't ye see him?


Passion blinds me, and this Rascal has distracted me. -- I'll sacrifice ye,
you Dog; you mustn't think to escape. --


Hear a little, I beseech ye.


Speak, I do hear. --


Why this Usage, Sir? -- Had not I been quick enough? -- If I had got Pacolet's
Horse, I could not have came sooner.


Hold, good Sir; we came as great a Pace as we could.


A Hare's or Snails pace, 'tis all one; I'm resolved to beat the Rascal as long
as he can stand. -- Imprimis, for the House-top; -- Item, for the Tile; --
Item, for shutting me out; -- Item, for your mocking me; -- Item, for your
saucy Tongue; --


What has he done, Sir?


Done, quoth a? -- He shut the Door upon me, and shamefelly abused me from the
House-top.


I, Sir?


Yes you, who so insolently threatened me if I offered to touch the Door. --
Dog, do ye deny it too?


Why should n't I? Here's a sufficient Witness to justify it; the same you sent
my in all haste to invite to Dinner.


Who sent ye, Impudence?


You, Sir.


When, I pray?


Just now, very lately, but a moment since; when you and your Lady were
reconciled within.


The Fellow's bedeviled sure.


I defy the Devil and all his Works. -- You ordered me to clean all the
Vessels, for you had a Sacrifice to offer: and then you sent me for this
Gentleman, to take a Dinner with ye.


Let me perish, if ever I set step within Doors, or sent him any where. --
Where did ye leave me last, Sirrah?


At home with your Lady; from whence I hastened to the Port, invited him as y'
ordered me, and here we are. I ne'er had one Glimpse of ye since then.


Impudent Dog, with my Wife? -- Now you mustn't think t'escape my Hands.


Mr. Blepharon! --


Good my Lord, spare him for my sake, and hear me.


Well, speak your Pleasure.


He has been telling of me wonderful strange Stories; and perhaps some Juggler
or Sorcerer, has bewitched your Family. Y' had best make a strict Enquiry into
the Business, and not use the poor Fellow like a Dog, before you know a jot of
the matter.


Come then, let's enter the House; I must have ye for a Witness in my Wives
Case.


Who's that made our Doors fly after such a vengenable rate? Who dares cause
such a Riot before my House? If I catch him, I'll sacrifice his Soul to the
Teleboan Ghosts. -- Blepharon and Socia, to hunt up my Cozen Naucrates; him I
can't find high nor low, and the other two I've quite lost. -- O here they are.
-- I'll go to 'em to know how Matters stand.


O, Mr. Blepharon, that's my Master that comes from the House; 'tis this is the
Sorcerer.


Bless me! what do I see? -- This isn't He, but the Other. And if this be
Amphitryon, troth that can't, unless he be double.


Here's Blepharon and Socia together: I'll begin with them first. -- Socia? I
begin to have a Stomach.


Didn't I tell ye this was the Sorcerer?


No, that's he, my Theban Neighbours, that has corrupted my Wife, and heaped
Dishonour upon my Head.


My Lord, your Stomach may be empty, but I'm sure I'm come with my Belly full of
Cuffs.


Still in that Humour, Rascal.


Get ye to the Devil, ye damned Sorcerer.


Call me Sorcerer, Slave?


How dare you have the Insolence to beat my Servants?


Thine?


Yes Mine.


You lye, Sir?


Go in, Socia, and hasten the Dinner; while I make an Example of this Fellow.


I go, Sir. -- This-Amphitryon and That-Amphitryon, will be just as civil as
that between I-Socia and Me-Socia. Well, the time they're squabbling abroad,
I'll in and ransack the Kitchen, lick all the Platters clean, and suck my sweet
Face with all the Liquor I can find.


Dare ye give me the Lye?


Yes that I dare, thou cursed Corrupter of my Family.


For that Affront, I'll throatle ye.


Oh, oh!


You should have had more Forecast then.


Help, good Blepharon.


They're so alike, I can't tell which side to take; but I'll part the Fray as
well as I can. -- Pray One-Amphitryon, don't murder The other Amphitryon. -- Good
now let go.


Call ye him Amphitryon?


Why not? He was formerly single, now he's become double. Though indeed you're
the Man, he's still the Person: therefore pray let go.


Well then. -- But in earnest do ye take him for Amphitryon?


Faith both of ye.


Heavens bless me! Where got ye that Shape of mine? Amphitryon?


Are you he that deny it?


I am; since there's ne'er another Amphitryon in all Thebes. --


But me, I grant ye; and, Blepharon, be you Judge.


I'll clear the Business by Tokens, if I can. -- Do you answer first then.


With all my heart.


What Orders did ye give me before the Battle with the Taphians?


When the Vessel was ready, not to part from the Stern a moment, --


-- Because if our Army were routed, I might secure my own Retreat.


I ordered ye besides, to have an Eye to the great Bag of money I left with ye.


How much?


Hold a little, Sir; that's a Question for me to ask. -- Do you know the Sum?


Yes, it amounted to fifty Attic Talents.


Right to a Farthing. -- How many pieces of Gold were there?


Two thousand.


And twice as many Brass.


You've both nicked it. -- Certainly one of ye must have been enclosed in the
Bag.


But observe Sir; to clear all, this right hand slew Pterelas; I received his
Spoils; his Drinking-Cup I had in a Casket; I gave't my Wife, and this day did
I bath with her, sacrifice with her, and lye with her.


That Word stabs me. I'm almost distracted: I sleep and dream with my Eyes open,
and perish with my Health and Senses about me. -- Certainly I am that
Amphitryon, Gorgophon's Grand-child, General of the Thebans, Creon's Friend,
Conqueror of the Teleboans, of the Acarnanians, and Taphians, and by my Courage
slew their King. There I made Cephalus Governor, the great D^oneus's Son; and
--


-- There by my Valour, defeated those Ravagers, who had killed Electryon, and
my Wife's Brothers; wasted Achaia, Etolia, and Phocis; and scoured the Ionian,
Egean, and Cretian Seas from their Privateers.


Bless me! I can't believe my self, he has so hit upon every Punctilio. -- What
say you, Blepharon?


There's one Proof behind; if that be made out, ye must certainly be double.


O, you mean the Scar of my right Arm, caused by the Wound Pterelas ga' me.


The same.


Well thought on.


Do ye see? -- look here.


Uncover both of ye, that I may see.


We have; now look.


Heavens, what do I see? Both marked in the same Arm, in the same Place, and
exactly with the same Scar, a little reddish just like a late Wound. The Proofs
are equal, the Determination unfixed, and I can go no further. -- You two must
decide the Business between both, for my Affairs call me away. -- Never did I
see such a strange sight in my born days.


Good Blepharon, don't leave me in distress, but be my Counsellor a while.


Adieu. -- What signifies a Counsellor when he knows not which side to plead
of?


I'll go in. Alcmena cries out.


Ruined for ever! Abandoned by my Friends and and Counsellors. But by Heaven,
this damned Impostor shall not abuse me unrevenged, whoever he be. I'll
immediately to the King, and acquaint him with the whole Business. As I hope to
live, I'll severely punish this Hellish Sorcerer. who has played such villainous
Tricks with my whole Family. -- Thebes ever produce a greater Wretch? -- What
Course can I take? All the World deny me, and make a Mock of me as they please.
'Tis fixed at last; I'll break in upon 'em, and the first living Creature I
meet, whether Maid or Man, Wife or Stallion, nay Father or Grandfather, I'll
murder upon the Spot. Though mighty Jove, and all the Gods, should interpose, I'd
perfect my Design. Now I'll enter the House. --


ALL my Hopes and Means of Safety are fled; and I've nothing to support my
drooping Spirits, since all Things, even Seas, Earth, and Heaven, seem to
conspire t'overwhelm and ruin me. -- Mercy upon me! What shall I do? I've seen
so many Prodigies within. -- O wretched! ready to swoon; O for a little Water,
my Heart chills and faints away, my Head ake^, my Ears and Eyes fail me, and
I'm the saddest shiftless Creature upon Earth; such strange Things befell my
Lady. -- For when she was going of her Labour, she invoked the Gods. Lord, what
Voices and Noises, what Clashes and Flashes; how suddenly, how frequently, how
terribly it thundered! Every Soul fell flat at the Greatness of the Claps. At
the same time a mighty Voice was heard, crying, Alcmena, Succour's at hand,
shake off all dread; the great King of Heaven's come to you and your Family's
Protection. Rise all, who fell at the terror of my Voice. At that I got up; and
the House appeared so very bright, that methought 'twas all in Flames. My Lady
she called me, which r^is'd new Fears, suspecting her Safety. I went in all
haste to know her Pleasure; where I found her happily delivered of two Boys,
and that without the least Suspicion or Knowledge of any of us. -- But what's
here? What old Gentleman's this who lies before our Door? Is he Thunder-struck
by Iupiter? -- Really, I believe 'tis so. -- Bless me, he seems dead! -- I'll
go find who 'tis. -- O, 'tis my Lord Amphitryon. --


Alas!


Rise, Sir.


Ruined!


Give me your hand, my Lord.


Who's that?


Your Maid Bromia.


I tremble all over; Jove has so stunned me. -- I'm just as tho I had been at
Hell. -- Why came y' out?


We, poor Souls, were in as great a Fright as you, we saw so many Prodigies
within Doors. -- Alas, my Lord, I had not yet recovered my Senses.


Come, let's talk with ye. -- Do you indeed know me for your Master Amphitryon?


Yes, Sir.


See that you be certain of't.


I am.


She's the only unmad Person'o' my Family.


Indeed, my Lord, we're none of us mad.


I'm sure my Wives base Disloyalty has made me so.


I'll soon change your Opinion in that point, my Lord; and in few Words show ye
most apparent Proofs and Tokens, of both your Lady's Goodness and Fidelity. --
First, you must know, she's brought to bed of two Boys.


How, of two Boys?


Yes, Sir.


Heavens be favourable! --


Let me speak, and I'll tell ye how tender the Gods ha'been o'your Lady and the
whole Family.


Speak then.


When my Lady began to go of her Labour, and perceived the Approach of the
usual Pains; with her Hands washed, and Head covered, she implored the
Assistance of the Gods. Immediately it thundered so dreadfully, we first
thought the whole House would have fallen. Then every thing shined so
gloriously, as if they were made of Gold.


Pray ease me a little, now you've deceived me enough. -- What follow'd?


In the mean time, your Lady was delivered, and truly without any Pains, for
not a Groan, or the least Complaint, was heard to come from her.


I'm glad of that, whatever she has deserved at my Hands.


Those things apart, and hear the rest. -- After her Delivery, she gave us both
the Children to wash. We took 'em, and the Boy that sell to my share, was so
big, and withal so vastly strong, that we could not bind him in his Blankets.


These are Wonders indeed; if all be true, I do not question my Wives
particular Assistance from above.


You'll say there are greater behind. -- After he was laid in his Cradle, two
hugeous great Serpents came rolling down the Water-Spout into the Chamber, both
rearing up their Heads --


Lack a day!


You needn't fear any thing. -- The Serpents casting their Eyes about, and
spying the Children, immediately made for the Cradles. Upon this, I drew 'em up
and down, backwards and forwards, terribly afraid of the Children, and my self
too, they pursued 'em so fiercely. When the Child, I told y'of, saw this, he
immediately started out of his Cradle, fell furiously upon 'em, and suddenly
grasping each Serpent in his Hand, --


'Tis wonderful strange. -- This is such a dreadful Business, as sets me a
shaking all over. -- But what's next? Proceed.


-- He destroyed both the Serpents at once. In the mean time, my Lady was
called with a loud Voice by --


Whom?


-- Jove, the great King of Heaven and Earth, who openly declared he had lain
with my Lady in your Absence, and how that very Child who slew the Serpents was
his; the other, yours.


In good troth, I like this well enough, to be Sharer with Jove himself in his
good Fortunes. -- Go in, and get all the Vessels ready for a Sacrifice quickly,
that I may thank him for his Favours with a great many Victims.


I'll immediately to the Divine Tiresias, consult him in what's fittest to be
done; and tell him the whole Business from the Beginning to the Ending. --


Courage, Prince Amphitryon; I'm come at last to calm all yours and your
Families Troubles. Shake off all Fears. Enquire nothing of Divines and
Prophets, for I, great Jove, can better tell of past and future Things than
they. -- First, I enjoyed Alcmena, by which she proved with Child; you had left
her with Child too, when you went into the Campaign; of which two, she is
brought to bed at once. That one that sprung from me, by his renowned Acts
shall gain immortal Honour. As for Alcmena, receive her to your former Favour.
She has n't deserved the least Reproach you gave her; for she could not resist
my Power. -- Now I'll return to Heaven.


I'll obey your great Commands, and humbly beg the Performance of your
Promises. -- I'll now to my Wife, and let old Tiresias alone. --


Gallants, for Honour's Sake, and Great Iove's Cause, We hope you'll crown us
with one loud Applause.


THE Subject of this Play is the most single that can possibly be, it being
only the Birth of Hercules, and likewise the most noble of all the Comedies of
the Ancients; not only for the bringing forth of such a Hero, but also for its
Attendance by no less than two Gods, and with Thunders and Lightnings. This
Subject, though great, is naturally very barren, especially if compared with many
others; but this makes the Poet's Art appear still greater, in finding
Incidents sufficient for a whole Play, when he had so little matter to work
upon: and in the natural Management of those, he is admirable.

THE Prologue is spoken by Mercury, not only because he was the most proper
Person to say and relate such Things as the Poet had most occasion for; but
likewise, because it would not have been so probable for another Person to have
been abroad at that time of Night.

Page. 3. lin. 17. c. By Jove' s Orders I came, Mercury' s my Title, sent hither
by my Father to beg your Attention.] Mercury, being in Disguise, and not in a
Machine, as soon as he could take breath after his long-winded Sentence, he
tells the Spectators who he is. For tho, from that Sentence, they might pretty
well guess at him, (more perhaps from his Offices than his Oratory) yet the
Poet takes care to make every thing perfectly clear, and intelligible, to the
Spectators; that, above all things, they might never be at a Loss as to the
Plot.

Page. 5. l. 3. And I'll make it a Hodge-podge, a Tragi-Comedy.] Faciam ut
commixta sit Tragico-comaedia. This is the only Play among the Ancients, that
was called Tragic Comedy; and this but in jest neither. But Plautus meant no
such thing as we do by our Word Tragi-Comedy, as appears by the four following
Verses: For always among the Ancients, the Representation of Kings and Great
Men's Actions, made a Tragedy, and those of Common Persons, Comedy, whether the
Catastrophe's were prosperous or not, in either. If I had translated it, a
Tragical-Comedy, perhaps it might have been nigher the Author's Design, and as
agreeable to the Comical Humour of him who spoke it.

Ibid. l. 8. c. To order the Guards to inspect Pit, Box, and Gallery, and if
they find any suborned to clap an Actor, to take his Cloak for a Pawn.] Ut
conquisitores singuli in subsellia eant per totam caveam, spectatoribus, si cui
fautores delegatos viderint, uti iis in cavea pignus capiantur togae. The
Romans were so great Encouragers of Plays, that they constantly ordered a
Reward for him who played his Part best, which was paid him by the Edils, who
were sworn to do Justice; and this often caused great Contests and Parties
among 'em. I translated, Conquisitores, Guards; Subsellia, and totam caveam,
Pit, Box, and Gallery; and Togae, Cloak, because they are the same in effect. I
always take the like Liberty in such Cases, and that without any Design of
changing the Scene to London.

Ibid. l. penuit. c. A year ago, when the Players invoked him in a pitiful
Farce, he came to their Assistance.] Etiam histriones anno cum in proscenio hic
Iovem invocarunt, venit: auxilio eis fuit. Some read it, Nannio cum in
proscenio, supposing it an Allusion to a Play called Nannium proscenium, from a
famous Courtesan of that name: But this is very doubtful; and though,
questionless, it is a sharp Reflection upon some Play in those times; yet, on
what, is uncertain. What Liberty is taken in the Translation, is only to make
the Satyr of it more intelligible.

Page. 6. l. 5. First, this City is called Thebes; c.] Here begins a Narration
of all that was done before the opening of the Stage. This was Plautus's way in
the rest of his Prologues, a thing which Terence never did; and truly Plautus
is not to be commended for this; for it may seem to argue a want of Dexterity
in doing of it by the Actors Mouths. But since the Prologue is no part of the
Play, all being entire and complete without it; and if these Narrations foretell
nothing, like those of Euripides, their principal Fault then is, their being
wholly Impertinent.

Page. 7. l. 15. c. Now, to distinguish us easily, I have little Wings upon my
Hat, and my Father a golden Tuft upon his.] This is a second Instance of
Plautus's Care of preventing all manner of Obscurity, or Confusion, in the
Spectators; and though it is here done with no great Address, (since 'tis all in
a Prologue) yet it may serve for a hint of the great Exactness of the Ancients
in this Point; whereas the Moderns fail in nothing more than this; and by that
means often miss of Success in their greatest Beauties.

Page. 8. l. 8, c. Out of which damned Kitchen, to morrow must I be dished up
for the Whipping-Post.] Inde cras e promtuaria cella depromar ad flagrum. The
Joak of this cannot easily be preserved in our Language; which chiefly consists
in the double Signification of the Word Depromo, which is either to Draw, or to
Take, or else a proper Term in Cookery, such as, to Dish, to Serve up, or the
like.

Page. 10. l. 7, c. Madam, at our first happy Arrival at the Enemies Country,
c.] Here begins an admirable Narration of a Battle; excellent, first, for the
perfect Compleatness of the Description in so few Words, with an Air of
Grandeur, which makes it more diverting in a Servants mouth; but more
especially, for the extraordinary Address of the Poet by finding such an
ingenious Pretext for letting the Spectators know a thing so very necessary for
their understanding the Plot, and that by the mouth of a single Person; so,
both seriously informing, and comically delighting 'em the same time. If any
object, that the Language is too good for a Servant; it may be replied, that
Socia says not a word but what he heard from others, and what he says now, is
only to have his Speech perfect.

Page. 12. l. 21, c. Except that night I had the Strapado, and rid the Wooden
Horse till Morning.] Nisi item unam, verberatus quam pependi perpetem. Slaves,
when they were beaten, were often hung up by the Legs or Hands, and kept in
that Posture for a considerable while. For the Liberty I have taken, see the
latter part of the fourth Remark upon the Prologue.

Page. 13. l. 6. This may be some Rogue to steal my Cloak off my Back.] Illic
hoc homo denuo volt pallium detexere. The Word Detexere, is a Weavers Term,
signifying to Put on to the Loom, and the like. Now Socia seeing Mercury in a
remarkable Posture, with his hands lifted up, he pleasantly intimates as though
he had stood ready to take his Cloak, and new weave it for him; but this is not
easily preserved in our Tongue. I believe it would have done better, and nigher
to the Author's Design, if I had translated it, I'm afraid this Fellow has some
great Business with my Cloak.

Ibid. l. 24. Dissociate me to Quintus.] Quintus fiam e Sosia. The Jest of
this, in the Original, is much greater than in the Translation: For it was
usual among the Romans, to call their Sons by the Names of Primus, Secundus,
Tertius, Quartus, Quintus, Sextus, c. according to their Births; as likewise
their Daughters by the Names of Prima, Secunda, Tertia, Quarta, c.

Page. 14. l. 21. Far enough lately.] Verum lunge binc abfuit. As Madam Dacier
observes, it is Socia that says this, and not Mercury, as it is in all the
common Books.

Page. 15. l. 19, c. Whither away, Sirrah? you that carry Fire in your
Lantborn.] Quo ambulas, tu, qui Vulcanum in cornu conclusum geris? I do not see
how the Comicalness of this Passage can be preserved in our Tongue.

Ibid. l. 27, c. Sirrah, you'll be kicked. Soc. You lye, Sir, for once.]
Verbero. So. Mentiris n^nc jam. The Jest here is wholly lost in the
Translation, which consists in the double meaning of the Word Verbero; which is
either a Noun, signifying, A Slave that deserves to be beaten; or a Verb,
signifying, I beat you. Now Mercury used it in the former Sense, and Socia took
it in the latter; and though it be but an ordinary Jest, it was agreeable enough
to Socia's Character.

Page. 16. l. 1, c. Sirrah, I shall stop that damned foul Mouth of yours. Soc.
'Tis past your skill, Sir. 'Tis kept as well and as clean as any Mans.] Ego
tibi istam body scelestam comprimam linguam. So. Haud potes: been pudiceque
asservatur. This is exactly of the same Stamp with the last; playing upon the
double meaning of the Word Comprimo, which signifies, to Stop, Stay, or
Repress; as likewise, to lye with a Woman. It was used in the former Sense by
the first, and taken in the latter by the l^st; and has nothing of that ill
meaning which the Commentators and others imagine, they being most certainly in
the wrong. I have more successfully translated, or rather imitated, this than
the last, by making the Opposites, Foul and Clean, as he had done Comprimo and
Pudice; especially since, I'll stop your foul Mouth, is as common a Phrase
among us, as Comprimam linguam was among the Romans.

Ibid. l. 19. I shall exalt your Worship to the Honour.] Faciam ego body te
superbum. Some think that the Word Superbum, here signifies Death, and
Auferere, immediately after, being carried in a Coffin, or the like; and others
think Superbum, a great Swelling, by the Blows he would give him. But the way
that I have done it, seems to me to be much the more natural Sense, and to have
the most Wit in it.

Page. 17. l. 4, c. You came with your Feet, not with your Clothes.] Certe
pedibus, non tunicis venis. This, in its self, is one of the meanest Jests in
the Play; but considering that Mercury had to deal with a mean, cavilling,
quibbling Fellow, who wrested all his Words to a wrong Meaning, (particularly
his Verbero and Comprimo) and one whom he was to banter all the ways he could,
it seems proper enough in this place.

Page. 21. l. 8, c. He has erected my Statue in my Lifetime; I ll be sworn no
body will honour me so much after I'm dead and gone.] Vivo fit, quod nunquam
quisquam mortue faciet mihi. This is Wit in all Languages.

This Scene is a Part of the Prologue; for which our Poet is not to be excused,
not only for placing of it here, and so confounding the Spectators Attention by
mingling their Concerns with the Actors, but likewise foretelling in it, the
Catastrophe, which ought to have been carefully concealed from them. The first
of these Faults, to wit, his mingling the Actors and Spectators Concerns, he is
several times guilty of in other Plays, and when it is not by way of Prologue
neither; but the latter, he is guilty of no where but in his Prologue to
Poenulus, that I remember.

Page. 22. l. 12. My Father's so tender of Alcmena.] Alcumena hujus honoris
gratia, pater curavit. As Madam Dacier observes, this Tenderness is in respect
of her Health and Body, and not of her Reputation, as the Word Honoris seem to
imply.

Page. 23. l. 1. Take care of the bringing up the Child.] Verum quod erit natum,
tollito. It seems very odd to us, that Iupiter should leave such an impertinent
useless Command with Alcmena; but in those days nothing was more common, than
the exposing of their Children, so that this Order was very proper at that
time; and the Word Tollito alludes to that very Custom.

Ibid. l. 14. If your Lady should find out the Cheat.] Illa si istis rebus
te^sciat operam dare. It is a great doubt among the Interpreters, whether this
Illa means Iano or Alcmena; therefore I have done it in as general Terms as my
Author has.

Page. 25. l. 8. This has been a longer night than ordinary.] Many Learned Men
have mistaken this long Night for that of Hercules's Begetting, and so have
thought this Play had continued nine or ten Months; whereas this, most
evidently, is that immediately before his Birth; our Poet not going according
to the common Fable, as they supposed he did.

THE first Interval is filled up with Socia's returning to the Port, to tell
his Master Amphitryon all the strange Things he had seen.

It ought to be observed, that the whole time of this Scene's acting,
Amphitryon, Socia, and the Prisoners, are moving towards the Front of the
Stage, and Amphitryon's Door; which may well enough be, considering the
Vastness of the Roman Stage, being 180 Foot in the Front. This Scene cannot be
represented with nigh the Probability upon our small Stage.

Page. 28. l. 23. The Fellow's bewitched, and fallen into some ill hands.] Huic
la nescio quid est mali mala objectum man^. Our Phrase, Ill Hands, has the
same meaning that Mala manu has here, which signifies those of Witches, or
Sorcerers; therefore Socia's Jest, immediately following, is as effectual in
the Translation as in the Original. I added the Word Bewitched, to make it
still more clear.

Page. 31. l. 16, c. Why there's your Lady has dined, by her Belly. Amp. 'Po,
Blockhead, I left her with Child when I went to the Campaign.] I am apt to
believe, that this Jest of Socia's would scarcely pass Muster upon our Theatre,
though in a Farce; yet still it serves to keep up the Character, and carry on the
Humour of a mean Slave, such as Socia was. But what is most remarkable, is,
that this insipid Jest should be a Preparation to the Main Incident, and there
is but one more in the whole Comedy, except in the Prologue, which in reality
is no part of a Play. If the Matter of a Preparation be ridiculous, it is
oftentimes the Poet's Art and Cunning, though I know not whether I may say it
(...) so here.

Page. 33. l. 34, c. Yes, Madam, there are Fruits too, of ^ying-in Women, and
Fruits too, to strengthen their Hearts, and keep 'em from Swooning.] Enimvero
pregnanti oportet malum, malum dari, ut quod obrodat sit, animo si male esse
occaeperit. The Wit (or whatever the Reader please to call it) of this Passage,
consists in Socia's playing upon the ambiguous Word Malum, which Alcmena had
spoken just before; and this signifies either a Mischief, or an Apple;
therefore nothing, that I know of, in our Language, could answer it so well as
Fruits, which may be taken in either good or bad Sense.

Page. 38. l. 5. You complained of Drowsiness.] This is the middle of a
remarkable Narration, which is, by pieces, scattered through this and the
Second Scene. The Poet ingeniously contrives here, to tell the Spectators of
many considerable Matters, and yet, all the time, seems to have no manner of
Design for any such thing, but a quite different one. This sort of Address is
always to be admired, and as much to be imitated.

Ibid. l. 21. A very pretty Business; if she has taken away his Manhood, and
made him a Lady.] Haeret haec res: siquidem haec jam mulier facta ^st ex viro.
This is right Socia again, playing upon the Word Vir, which Amphitryon had just
upbraided his Wife with, signifying both Husband, and Man. Here, by luck, the
Word Lord has preserved the Jest as well.

Ibid. l. 13. I ne^re gave t'any Man but you, the least Liberty, c.] Ut mi
extra unum te mortalis nemo corpus corpore contigit. If Plautus has made
Alcmena speak here according to her high Quality, as I doubt not but he has; it
plainly appears, that our way of expressing Things in this nature, is more
modest, clean, and genteel, than theirs usually was.

THE second Interval is filled up with Amphitryon's going to search for
Naucrates.

This Scene is still but a part of the Prologue; and though it be a great Fault
to confound the Spectators Concerns with the Theatral-Action, and such as
cannot be vindicated; yet at the same time, it ought not to be forgotten, that
the Prologue is never any part of the Play, as I observed before.

Page. 41. l. 3. My Lodgings are in the upper Garret.] In superiore ^ui habito
coenaculo. If this Passage be considered as spoken immediately to the
Spectators, it is very comical; for whether he be looked upon as real Iupiter,
or as a poor Player and Slave, whose Lodgings were always in the Garret, it
agrees exactly with him. But this is almost lost in our Tongue, even though a
better Word than Garret were used.

Ibid. l. penult. c. The House is grown odious to me now, since my Lord accuses
me of Dishonesty, Shame, and Infamy.] The Poet had a very great Occasion for
Alcmena's appearing at this time, both for the Reconciliation, and the notable
Consequences thereof: But see what an ingenious Pretext he finds for her coming
there at that time; as likewise he has, at the two other times she appears,
when both the Hour and Place might have made it very improbable for a Woman of
her Rank and Quality. Whenever this Rule is not observed in a Play, nothing
seems more forced and unnatural, nothing more botched and bungl'd.

Page. 43. l. 9, 10. Let me beg, and entreat ye, to forgive, forget, and be
pacified.] Oro, obsecro, da mihi hoc veniam, ignosce, irata no sies. This
Place, among many others, may be an Instance of my binding my self so
scrupulously to my Author's Words, even when they have just the same
Signification, which often makes a Translation the worse, as, perhaps, in this
place. But whenever such be made to run well, it does not only show the
Translator's Skill, and the Copiousness of our Words or Expressions, but
likewise is very useful to teach young Scholars both Languages at once.

Ibid. l. 13, 14. Farewell, keep your own Things, and let me have mine.] Valeas,
tibi habeas res tuas, re^das mea^. This was the constant Form of Words used at
a Divorc^, and consequently the Beauty of it must be lost in our Language.

Page. 44. l. 3, c. I must send for Blepharon, our Ships Pilot, t'invite him to
Dinner. -- But not a mouthful shall Socia get; and here'll be rare sport when I
come to grapple with Amphitryon.] Iupiter's sending for Blepharon, was an
excellent Preparation of the Poet's, to cause all that Sport which happened in
the Fourth Act, and to bring about the Catastrophe more dexterously; but still
he took care to have a fair Pretence for so doing. His foretelling something of
this sport, in another place, would have been a Fault, but here it serves
purely to raise the Audiences Expectations; and nothing makes a Play succeed
better than doing of that well.

Page. 45. l. ult. The mean time I'm sacrificing to my self.] Here ends the
Third Act, which is contrary to all the common Books, which make it end a Scene
after. Here is a manifest Cessation of Action upon the Stage, when in the other
there is none.

THE third Interval is filled up with Amphitryon's looking for Naucrates,
Socia's for Blepharon, and with Iupiter's and Alcmena's Sacrificing.

The greatest part of this Scene, makes the last Part of the Prologue, or at
least, it is so much of that Nature as properly enough to be called by that
Name, though it be not placed before the Play, as the Word Prologue, in the
most strict Sense, implies.

Page. 46. l. 7, c. Their vast haste, is only for a Vessel safely arrived, an
old Fellow upon the Fret, or so.] This, and a Line or two before, was designed
by Plautus for a Satyr upon some of the Play-Wrights of his time, whose
chiefest Beauties, it seems, consisted in a Slave's running in vast haste with
some such News as before mentioned, and throwing down all he meets; so making
the Spectators laugh by such means, when they could not by better.

In this little Scene, there is a great deal of Art of the Poet, by making
Amphitryon so particularly tell the several places he had been at, to look for
Naucrates; for if it had been otherwise, the Spectators might all have wondered
that Socia did not meet him, since he was gone but a little before to the same
place; and their Meeting would have spoiled the whole Plot. This is an
excellent Instance of the exact Probability that the Ancients observed; and
what is still remarkable, is, that though at another time it would have been
undecent, and unlikely for a Man of his Quality to look himself at so many
places, yet now it was highly probable, since he was so extremely overcome with
Rage and Jealousy.

Page. 48. l. 21. Thou cursed branded Rogue.] Ulmorum acheruns. That is to say,
One whose Back had consumed as much Brush-Wood as Hell could. A Verbal
Translation, in this place, would have sounded wretchedly. Perhaps, Thou Plague
to the Whipping-Post, might have done as well as any.

Ibid. l. antepenult. c. Then I shall sacrifice -- Amp. What? Me^. Something to
your Worship's Pate.] Sacrifico tibi. Am. Qui? Me. Quia enim te macto
infortunio. The Jest of this Passage consists in Mercury's playing so comically
upon the Word Macto, which is a proper Term used in Sacrificing, and, in that
place, the same with Magis aucto, and Augeo; and whereas it is usually joined
to Honore, and the like, he merrily joins it to Infortunio, as it is in
Terence's Phormio. This cannot be preserved in our Tongue; yet this Translation
does in a great measure answer the Design.

Page. 49. l. 1. You, Iail-bird?] Tun' me mactes, carnufex? All from this, to
nigh the End of this Act, is generally supposed to have been done by another
hand; but whether it be so or no, I shall not offer to determine. However, it
is undoubtedly very ancient, and the Plot and Incidents as well carried on as
Plautus himself could have done; and I believe that those Persons who seem able
to prove it not his by the difference in Stile, will be less able to do it by
the difference in Spirit and Genius.

Ibid. l. 20. Y' ought to get your Brains cleared.] Bacchanal te exercuisse
oportuit. This is spoken in Reference to Drunkenness, or rather indeed Madness,
which Mercury lays to Amphitryon's Charge; and therefore the Word Bacchus,
about 18 Verses after, in that place, seems properly enough translated,
T^m-a-Bedlam.

It is pleasant to observe how naturally the Comical Incidents in this Scene,
spring from their Preparations in the second and third Scenes of the third Act.

Page. 51. l. 19. But why do I mention Foreign Prodigies, c.] All this Monologue
is of a right Tragical Strain; the Passion truly just and natural; and the
Thought as ingenious and moral. It seems to be writ exactly with the same
Spirit as that Monologue in the beginning of the Second Scene of the Second
Act.

Page. 55. l. 11, c. Nothing goes well with me to day. I left Blepharon and
Socia, to hunt up my Cozen Naucrates; him I can't find high nor low, and
the other two I ve quite lost.] Many have mistaken the Design of this Place, and
have thought it was spoken by Amphitryon, or that something had been left out;
whereas Iupiter speaks this only to puzzle and confound Amphitryon, Blepharon,
and Socia, and so carry on his Design the better.

Page. 56. l. 17. For that Affront, I'll throatle ye.] It may seem very indecent
for Iupiter and Amphitryon to scuffle at this rate, and not rather to have
drawn their Swords; but this agrees exactly with that Character which Mercury
in the Prologue gives of this Play, when he calls it Tragic Comedy. Besides,
drawing of Swords might have proved too Tragical.

Page. 57. l. 15. Because if our Army were routed, I might secure my own
Retreat.] The Application of this Passage is very Satirical, considering this
Play was acted before the Romans, whose Generals were never used to practise
such ways. The Sharpness of the Reflection is considerably lost upon our
Stages.

Page. 58. l. 22. And I can go no further*.] Quid agam nescio. Here ends all
that which goes by the Name of Supposititious.

THE fourth Interval is filled by Amphitryon's being in a Swoon upon the Stage,
and Alcmena's Labour. This Interval is very peculiar; and I don't know another
Instance of this nature among the Ancients, but in the Hecuba of Euripides: So
that an Act is finished whenever the Stage is without Action, whether there be
an Actor there or no.

Page. 59. l. ult. Mercy upon me! What shall I do? I've seen so many Prodigies
within.] The Poet had a particular Occasion for Bromia's appearing at this
time; therefore he has found a very fair Pretext for bringing of her there, to
wit, the great Fright she was in within Doors, which Reason she more
particularly alleges in the next Scene.

Page. 60. l. 6, c. What Voices and Noises, what Clashes and Flashes? How
suddenly, how frequently, how terribly it thundered!] Strepitus, crepitus,
sonitus, tonitrus; ut subi^, ut propere, ut valide tonuit? It seems, among the
Ancients, whenever Iupiter appeared like a God, it was always with Thunder and
Lightning. Since this is a sort of a rumbling Passage in the Original, I have
also made it so in my Translation.

Ibid. l. 24. My Lord!] Here ends the first Scene. Now if any should blame me
for making a Distinction of Scenes when the same Persons are still upon the
Stage; I reply, That the very same Thing that made the Distinction of Acts, as
Amphitryon's Condition did, must undoubtedly make the Distinction of Scenes.

Page. 61. l. 16. First, you must know, she's brought to bed of two Boys.] This
is the Beginning of a pleasant and lively Narration, which is attended with all
its due Circumstances; to wit, the Place as well as the Party proper for the
Relation; the Person necessary to hear it; and, above all, the Design of
relating it, which was, The Vindication of Alcmena' s Honour. All these
Circumstances are not only to make it probable, but also to keep the Spectators
from supposing it made for their Information; which, though it is the principal
Design of all Narrations, yet nothing ought more industriously to be concealed
from them, than such a Design.

Iupiter's descending here, agrees exactly with Horace's Rule, Nec Deus
intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus inciderit. For a God could never come upon
a better Design, or in a better Time, to satisfy either Amphitryon, or the
Spectators.

Page. 64. l. 4. And great Jove' s Cause.] Iovis summi causa. The Romans
believed that this Play made much for the Honour of Iupiter; therefore,
afterwards, it was commonly Acted in Times of public Troubles and Calamities,
to appease his Anger.


